Good evening. I trust you had a fruitful day. I do not say happy, but I hope it has been happy.

*Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa. Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa. Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa.* Homage to the Buddha, the Blessed Noble and fully self-awakened one.

So this is the 65th YouTube broadcast. I think we're slowly coming to an end. Mind you, there's lots of scriptures. Anyway, we'll carry on with this number 77, the Sakuludāyī Sutta. So it's a wanderer called Sakuludāyī. And we switched really to the teaching of the Buddha himself, which were the 37 factors of enlightenment. But the opening of it is an interesting conversation, so we'll have a look at that.

As usual, the Blessed One was going out for alms, but he was a bit early, so he went to the shrine at Rajagaha—that's Rajgir, where King Bimbisara lived, just north along the Ganges. It's called the Peacock's Sanctuary. And there was a large assembly of wanderers who were making an uproar, loudly and noisily talking about many kinds of pointless things.

Now, what would be these pointless things? Well, such talk of kings, robbers, ministers, armies, dangers, battles, food, drink, clothing, beds, garlands, perfumes, relatives, vehicles, villages, towns, cities, countries, women, heroes, streets, wells, the dead, trifles, the origin of the world, the origin of the sea, whether things are so or are not so. So those are the sorts of conversations that I think we all have at one point or another, but not particularly aiming at liberation—just ordinary prattle of ordinary daily life.

Anyway, when Sakuludāyī sees the Buddha coming, he says, "Oh, quiet, sirs, make no noise. Here comes the recluse Gotama. This venerable one likes quiet and commends quiet. Perhaps if he finds our assembly a quiet one, he will join us." So you get the feeling that there were a group of wanderers, probably somewhere around the Buddha's age, whom he knew well, and they knew him. And that's why on the way to alms, the Buddha thinks to himself, "I shall go to the sanctuary to have a chat with Sakuludāyī."

Anyway, when he arrives, they all sit there, and the Buddha wants to know what they were talking about. And Sakuludāyī says, "I forget that—let's talk about something a bit more to the point." And he says this: So he's now comparing the other major teachers of the time, about five or six of them, with the Buddha and how the disciples treat them.

"So this Pūraṇa Kassapa is the head of an order regarded by many as a saint, yet he is not honoured, respected, revered and venerated by his own disciples, nor do his disciples live in dependence on him, honouring and respecting him. Once Pūraṇa Kassapa was teaching his *dhamma* to an assembly of several hundred followers. Then a certain disciple of his made a noise. 'Sirs, do not ask Pūraṇa Kassapa this question. He does not know that. We know that. Ask us that question and we will answer it for you, sirs.' It happened that Pūraṇa Kassapa did not get his way, though he waved his arms and wailed. 'Be quiet, sirs. Make no noise, sirs. They are not asking you, sirs. They are asking us. We will answer them.' Indeed, many of his disciples left him after refuting his doctrine thus: 'You do not understand this *dhamma* and discipline. I understand this *dhamma* and discipline. How could you understand this *dhamma* and discipline? Your way is wrong. My way is right. I am consistent. You are inconsistent. What you should have said first, you said last. What you should have said last, you said first. What you had so carefully thought up has been turned inside out. Your doctrine is refuted. You are proved wrong. Go and learn better or disentangle yourself if you can.'"

This is Pūraṇa's earlier disciples who become disenchanted with him. Now, although they say that about these different teachers—obviously a bit of an exaggeration, no doubt—do remember that towards the latter part of the Buddha's life, his own cousin Devadatta rebelled against him, tried to kill him, it would seem, and started his own order elsewhere. So it wasn't just these people. However, at this present time, the Buddha has this great reputation.

So now, compared to that, he says, "Once the recluse Gotama was teaching his *dhamma* to an assembly of several hundred followers. And there a certain disciple of his cleared his throat. Thereupon, one of his companions in the holy life nudged him with his knee. 'Quiet, venerable sir, make no noise. The Blessed One, the teacher, is teaching us the *dhamma*.' When the recluse Gotama is teaching the *dhamma* to an assembly of several hundred followers, on that occasion, there is no sound of his disciples coughing or clearing their throats." So there's this great respect.

So now the Buddha asks, "Udāyī, how many qualities do you see in me because of which my disciples honour, respect, revere and venerate me, live in dependence on me, honouring and respecting me?"

Sakuludāyī replies, "Venerable Sir, I see five qualities. The Blessed One eats little and commends eating little. The second one is that he is content with any robe and commends contentment with any robe. That he is content with any kind of alms food and commends contentment with any kind of alms food. That one is content with any resting place and commends contentment with any resting place. And that the venerable one is secluded and commends seclusion."

So the first four are what we call the four requisites—food, clothing, alms food and resting place. Oh, I've just realised he hasn't got medicine, just alms food, really. So it's commends not eating so much and to be happy with alms food. So that's really just one requisite. Then there's the robes, the clothing, and then there's the resting place. And finally, secluded and commends seclusion. So he's left out medicine there, I don't quite know why.

So now the Buddha says, "Okay, that's true, but there are disciples of mine who live on a cupful or half a cupful of food, a bilva fruit and half a bilva fruit quantity of food, while I sometimes eat the full contents of my alms bowl and even more." So what he's saying is, fine, he does this, but he himself might not be the best exemplar. There are disciples of his who really do eat little, but what he's saying is I eat the contents of my bowl, et cetera.

"There are disciples of mine who are refuse rag wearers, wearers of coarse robes. They collect rags from the charnel ground, rubbish heaps or shops, make them into patched robes and wear them. But I sometimes wear robes given by householders, robes so fine that cotton hair is coarse by comparison." So what he's saying is that he's not the exact exemplar of all these commendations.

"Now there are disciples of mine who are alms food takers, go on unbroken alms round from house to house who delight in gathering their food when they've entered among the houses they do not consent even when invited to sit down but I sometimes eat on invitation meals of choice rice and many sauces and curries."

And then, "There are disciples of mine who are tree root dwellers and open air dwellers, who do not use a roof for eight months of the year"—in the rainy season, you need a roof, of course—"while I sometimes live in gabled mansions, plastered within and without, protected against the wind, secured by door bolts with shuttered windows."

"And then there are disciples of mine who are forest dwellers, dwellers in remote resting places, who live withdrawn in remote jungle thicket resting places and return to the midst of the *Saṅgha* once every half month for the recitation of the *Pāṭimokkha*"—that's the rules. "But I sometimes live surrounded by *bhikkhus* and *bhikkhunīs*, by men and women lay followers, by kings and kings' ministers, by other sectarians, and their disciples."

In other words, although he has commended these things, he himself is not a particularly good exemplar of it. So why is it then that the disciples do honour and esteem him?

So then he says to Udāyī, "My disciples esteem me for the higher virtue. The recluse Gotama is virtuous. He possesses supreme aggregates of virtue. This is the first quality because of which my disciples honour, respect, revere and venerate me and live in dependence on me, honouring and respecting me." So it's because people recognise his virtue that they honour him.

"And then they esteem me for my excellent knowledge and vision. When the recluse Gotama says, 'I know,' he truly knows. And when he says, 'I see,' he truly sees. The recluse Gotama teaches the *dhamma* through direct knowledge, not without direct knowledge. He teaches the *dhamma* with a sound basis, not without a sound basis. He teaches the *dhamma* in a convincing manner, not in an unconvincing manner." So that's to do with his teaching ability. It comes from his own personal experience and therefore has that ring of truth about it.

"They esteem for higher wisdom the recluse Gotama is wise. Possesses the supreme aggregate of wisdom it is impossible that he should not foresee the future courses of doctrines"—in other words how his what the implications will be of his teachings—"and that he should not be able to confute with reason the current doctrines of others." So in other words, his wisdom is based on direct experience. And therefore, when he actually explains it, it comes out as logical, straightforward and truthful.

"When my disciples have met with suffering and become victims of suffering, prey to suffering, they come to me and ask me about the noble truth of suffering. Being asked, I explain to them the noble truth of suffering and I satisfy their minds with my explanation. They ask me about the noble truth of the origin of suffering, the noble truth of the cessation of suffering and the noble truth of the way leading to the cessation of suffering. Being asked, I explain to them the noble truth of the way leading to the cessation of suffering and I satisfy their minds with my explanation. This is the fourth quality whereby my disciples honour me."

So he's pointing out there are four things that bring about a great respect for him. The first one is his virtue, his goodness, his goodness power, *puñña*. The second one is that he really comes from direct knowledge, personal direct knowledge. The third one is that when he teaches, it's obviously an expression of deep wisdom. And the fourth one is that he actually shows them the path, the practical way of becoming liberated from suffering.

So that's the conversation that he has with Sakuludāyī in the Peacock's Sanctuary. I hope that's been of some form of enlightenment. The way the Buddha talks, the way the Buddha sees himself is portrayed here. I can only hope that this little reading has been of some assistance and that you will, by your practice, liberate yourselves from all suffering sooner rather than later.