Good evening. I trust you had a fruitful day. I do not say happy, though I hope it has been happy.

*Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa.* 
*Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa.* 
*Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa.* 
Homage to the Buddha, the Blessed Noble and fully self-awakened one.

So no hitch tonight. We're going to get into the habit of rebooting the router every week. So that should stop the problem I had last night.

Now there comes a point in the discourses where there's a natural repetition of the teachings. Not only is there repetition within the discourse itself, but there's also throughout the discourses a repetition of the teachings. There's always something new added and a little nuance, you might say.

So this is the discourse on the cowherd. It's number 33. And the Buddha is at Anāthapindika's park again up in Sāvatthi, probably his most favourite place. And he's talking to the monks or to the people who are listening.

When a cowherd possesses eleven factors, he is incapable of keeping and rearing a herd of cattle. What eleven? Here, a cowherd has no knowledge of form. He is unskillful in characteristics. He fails to pick out the fly's eggs. He fails to dress the wounds. He fails to smoke out the sheds. He does not know the watering place. He does not know what it is to have drunk. He does not know the road. He's unskilled in pastures. He milks dry. And he shows no extra veneration to those bulls who are the fathers and leaders of the herd.

So these are the skills you need when you become a cowherd, okay? Don't all rush out now.

So now, of course, he uses these metaphors in order to talk about the Dhamma. So he says all that about people who are striving, shall we say. So here, remember, every time I say *bhikkhu*, it means anybody who's striving.

How has a *bhikkhu* no knowledge of form? Here he does not understand that it actually is all material form in whatever kind consists of the four great elements and the material form derived from the four great elements. So we're talking about what we would normally call matter, the body and what it's made of.

Now remember these four great elements as they're called, earth, fire, water and air—solidity, fluidity, elasticity, heat, cold and movement. That's how we contact matter. So it's not what matter is. We know it's chemicals and subatomic particles and all that. It's how the mind contacts matter. And he doesn't know it, this poor striver, or a real striver. And of course, everything is derived from that. In other words, that's at the base of all our experience. He doesn't know form, you see.

How is he unskilled in characteristics? He does not understand as it actually is, a fool is characterised by their actions and a wise person characterised by their actions. Can't tell the difference between a foolish person and a wise person.

How does he fail to pick out the fly's eggs? When a thought of sensual desire arises, the *bhikkhu* tolerates it. He does not abandon it, remove it, do away with it, annihilate it. And the same with thoughts of ill will and the same with thoughts of cruelty. So he's not quick. So a person who, when these thoughts come, are not quick to acknowledge it and say, "I see you, Māra," you see? Therefore not picking out the fly's eggs. And therefore you're left with a wound.

How does he fail to dress the wounds? On seeing form with the eye a *bhikkhu* grasps at its signs and features, gets attached to it. Even though when he leaves the eye faculty unguarded evil unwholesome states of covetousness and grief might invade him, he does not practise the way of its restraint. He does not guard the eye faculty. He does not undertake the restraint of the eye faculty. In other words, remember, every act of attention is an act of intention, and therefore it is conditioning, right? So once we've grasped that, every time we attend to something and we see it's unwholesome, we have to guard that sense. We mustn't put it there. I must take it away. And that also means knowing not where to go, not where to look, even before you see it, you might say.

So in this way, he leaves all these faculties unguarded and evil, unwholesome states of covetousness and grief—that's the usual indulgence and aversion—invade him.

So, okay, how does a *bhikkhu* fail to smoke out the sheds? Here he does not teach others in detail the Dhamma as he has learnt it and mastered it. So anytime there's an opportunity for us to teach the meditation or to tell somebody about the meditation or the practice of Buddhism, then we ought to do so. Failing to do so is a lost opportunity. I'm not so sure how that fits in with smoking out the sheds, but I'm sure one of you will email me. Anyway, that's called smoking out the sheds.

He does not know the watering place. Now, a *bhikkhu* does not go from time to time to those *bhikkhus* who have learnt much, who are well versed in the tradition, who maintain the Dhamma, the discipline and the codes. And he does not inquire and ask questions of them thus: "How is this, Venerable Sir? What is the meaning of this?" These venerables do not reveal in him what has not been revealed, do not clarify what is not clear, or remove his doubts about numerous things that give rise to doubts.

So in other words, he's not going to certain peoples or places, or in our terms, to books and reading and audios and other teachers to refine our understanding of the Dhamma and, of course, our practice. The Dhamma is both the understanding and the practice. The discipline and codes is, of course, our moral conduct.

How does a *bhikkhu* not know what it is to have drunk? When the Dhamma and the discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata is being taught, the *bhikkhu* does not gain inspiration in the meaning, does not gain inspiration in the Dhamma, does not gain gladness connected to the Dhamma. So when we are practising and we're no longer feeling inspired—no matter what level it is, it might just be 0.1—once we begin to lose inspiration, then of course we lose interest and the practice goes aside. So in a sense, we've got to read, we've got to practise to keep inspiring ourselves, keep encouraging ourselves to do that practice.

How does a *bhikkhu* not know the road? Here a *bhikkhu* does not understand the Noble Eightfold Path as it actually is.

Okay, so you know that.

How is he unskilled in pastures? Here a *bhikkhu* does not understand the four foundations of mindfulness as they actually are. So we did that when we did the four foundations of mindfulness in discourse number 10 on how to establish mindfulness. So remember that was mindfulness of the body, mindfulness of feelings, mindfulness of mind, mindfulness of dhammas. Seven factors of enlightenment. Pastures. It's often talked about the pastures. Pastures is used in the scriptures to mean where you should put your attention—on these pastures.

How does a *bhikkhu* milk dry? When faithful householders invite a *bhikkhu* to take as much as he likes of robes, alms food, resting places and medicinal requisites, the *bhikkhu* does not know moderation in accepting. So when we're visiting friends and family and they offer us biscuits, we have to be careful not to eat the whole packet.

How does a *bhikkhu* show no extra veneration to those elder *bhikkhus* of long standing, who've long gone forth, who are the fathers and leaders of the Sangha? Here a *bhikkhu* does not maintain bodily acts of loving-kindness, both openly and privately, the same with verbal acts and the same with mental acts. And this is how a *bhikkhu* shows no extra veneration to the elders.

So that's more specific to monks' relationship to the elders. But of course, it's just a general understanding. It's making a distinction between knowing somebody who is in authority as opposed to an authority. So when somebody is in authority, they are in authority over—so that might be your boss—fear, of course. But if somebody is an authority, then you look up to them and you respect them. And it's acknowledging that. You acknowledge this person's authority in any field of life. It doesn't matter if it's the Dhamma or not.

So when a *bhikkhu* possesses these eleven qualities, which are all negative, he is incapable of growth, increase and fulfilment in this Dhamma and discipline.

So now the whole section now repeats it all. It repeats everything we've just been through, only on a positive note. So finally, the Buddha says: when a *bhikkhu* possesses these eleven qualities, he is capable of growth, increase and fulfilment in this Dhamma and discipline.

This is what the Blessed One said, and the *bhikkhus* were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.

So that's that particular discourse.

Now, this is the beauty of this little book that I think I've shown you before, *Pressing Out Pure Honey* by Sharda Rajel. So here you see she puts those points very nicely for us: understanding that all material form of whatever kind—understanding that whether one is a fool or a wise person, one is characterised by one's actions; abandoning desire, ill will and cruelty—all evil and unwholesome states; practising restraint and guarding the sense doors and mind and mind objects so that greed and aversion do not arise in the mind; teaching others in detail the Dhamma as oneself has learned and mastered it; going to learned ones and asking pertinent questions in order to delve into the meaning of the Dhamma; gaining inspiration and gladness in the Dhamma; understanding the Eightfold Path as it actually is; understanding the four foundations of mindfulness as they actually are; taking in moderation whatever is offered; maintaining loving-kindness bodily, verbally and mentally, both openly and privately, to elders of long standing and to leaders of the Sangha.

There we are.

So I hope that has been an inspiration and that it will encourage you to continue your practice and achieve full liberation sooner rather than later.

So we can practise now a little bit ourselves.