I'll be slightly careful tonight as I've hurt my back a bit, but I shall live, I shall continue to live. Good evening. I trust you had a fruitful day. I do not say happy, though I'm sure it has been a very happy one.

*Namo Tassa Bhagavato Arahato Sammāsambuddhassa. Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa. Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa.* Homage to the Buddha, the blessed, noble and fully self-awakened one.

I thought these are my last two YouTubes, so I thought to spend them on the Buddha himself. This particular discourse, number 67, "At Catuma," shows us a little bit of tough love. Catuma is a place in the Sakyan country where he's from. He wasn't always a huggy-wuggy, touchy-feely sort of person.

He was living at Catuma, and on that occasion, 500 monks headed by Venerable Sāriputta and Venerable Moggallāna—they were his two lieutenants—came to see the Blessed One. While visiting, those monks were exchanging greetings with the resident monks and preparing resting places and putting away their bowls and outer robes. They were very loud and noisy.

The Blessed One said to Ānanda, "Who are these noisy people? One would think they're fishermen hauling fish." Ānanda said to him, "Well, it's these 500 *bhikkhus* that have come with Sāriputta and Moggallāna." He said, "Right. In my name, go and tell those monks to come and see me." "Yes, Venerable Sir."

Off they went, and these 500 monks turned up. They went to the Blessed One, paying homage to him, and sat to one side. The Blessed One said, "*Bhikkhus*, why are you so loud and noisy? One would think you're fishermen hauling fish." They said, "Well, we're part of the 500 *bhikkhus* headed by Sāriputta and Moggallāna who've come to see you, O Blessed One. While we were visiting, of course, we were being greeted by resident monks."

The Buddha said, "Fine. Go, because I dismiss you. You cannot live with me."

That's a bit sharp, isn't it? I mean, they've come a long way to see him and they made a bit of a noise, and he's chucked them out. "Yes, Venerable Sir," they said very meekly, I suppose. They rose, paid homage, and off they went. They had to get all their stuff and move out.

Now, on that occasion, the Sakyans of Catuma had met together in the assembly hall for some business or other. Seeing the monks coming in the distance, they went to them and asked, "What's going on?" "Friends, the Sangha of *bhikkhus* has been dismissed by the Blessed One. He sent us away." Then they said, "Well, look, stay here, be seated, and we will go and restore his confidence."

These very good Sakyans, who were obviously of the same group as the Buddha—his tribe, whatever you want to call it—went to see him. They said, "Blessed One, let the Blessed One delight in the Sangha of monks. Welcome the Sangha of monks. Show compassion towards the Sangha, as he used to show compassion towards it in the past. These have recently gone forth. They've come to the *dhamma* and discipline. If they can get no opportunities to see the Blessed One, there may take place in them some change or alteration"—which means for the worse, of course. They might give up. They might go to another teacher.

"Just as when young seedlings get no water, there may take place in them some change or alteration. Just as when a young calf does not see its mother, there may take place in it some change or alteration." So they're telling the Buddha to please forgive the *bhikkhus* and get them back, just in case they go off.

Now at the same time, Brahmā Sahampati—he's the god who turned up when the Buddha was fully liberated and sat there wondering whether he should tell anybody about this or not, wondering whether anybody would actually understand what he had to teach. It was this Brahmā, this great god, who came down and said, "Well, there are some who got a little dust in their eyes." That's when he thought about his past teachers and then thought about the five companions whom he'd left, and his teachings began on the prompting of Brahmā Sahampati.

This was such an occasion that the Brahmā thought he ought to go down and have a chat. He appeared before the Buddha and said exactly the same thing as the Sakyans did. The Sakyans of Catuma and Brahmā Sahampati were able to restore the Buddha's confidence with the similes of the seedlings and the young calf.

Moggallāna said, "Get up, friends, take your bowls and outer robes. The Blessed One's confidence has been restored, and we're going back to see him." Off they went.

When they were paying respects, the Buddha said to Venerable Sāriputta, "What did you think, Sāriputta, when the Sangha of *bhikkhus* was dismissed by me? What did you do?" "Venerable Sir, I thought thus: The Sangha of *bhikkhus* has been dismissed by the Blessed One. The Blessed One will now abide inactive, devoted to pleasant abiding here and now. We too shall now abide inactive, devoted to pleasant abiding here and now." In other words, meditation.

"Stop, Sāriputta, stop! No, no, no, don't think that way. Such a thought should not be entertained by you again."

Then he turned to Moggallāna and said, "What did you think, Moggallāna?" Moggallāna said, "Venerable Sir, I thought this way: The Sangha of *bhikkhus* has been dismissed by the Blessed One. The Blessed One will now abide inactive, devoted to pleasant abiding here and now. Now Venerable Sāriputta and I shall lead the Sangha of *bhikkhus*."

"Good, good, well said, Moggallāna! Either I shall lead the Sangha, or else Sāriputta and Moggallāna shall lead it."

Here we see that the Buddha had in mind that these two persons, younger than him—I think they would have been maybe ten or so years younger—would have led the Sangha after he died. But unfortunately, they both died before him. Sāriputta died at home. He went back to see his family. Moggallāna, it seems, was attacked and murdered by another set of ascetics because he was converting their people, which is a bit sad, isn't it? Dangerous to be a monk in those times.

The Blessed One then got them together and spoke to them. He said, "Look, there are four kinds of fears to be expected by one who goes down to the water. What are the four? Fear of waves, fear of crocodiles, fear of whirlpools, and fear of sharks. Four kinds of fetters are to be expected by certain persons who have gone forth from home to homelessness."

Now, of course, these fetters work just as much for anybody living an ordinary lay life.

What is the fear of waves? Somebody has gone forth from the home life, driven by thoughts of aging, sickness and death, despair and all that. After he's gone forth, his companions in the holy life advise and instruct him thus: "You should move to and fro in this way. You should look ahead and look away this way. You should flex and extend your limbs this way. You should wear your patched cloak and bowl and robes this way." 

Then the person says to himself, "Well, formerly when we were lay people, we advised and instructed others. Now these *bhikkhus* who seem like they might be our sons or grandsons think that they can advise and instruct us." So they forsake the training and revert to the lay life. He is called one who's forsaken the training and reverted, frightened by the fear of waves. Waves is a term for angry despair. They'd gone despairing about life and hoping to get some training, and they just couldn't take the training, basically. They just wanted to do it their way. So they left back into their angry despair. They were despairing before, but now they're angry as well.

What is the fear of crocodiles? Again, people joined the order, and his companions in the holy life advised and instructed him: "This can be consumed by you. This cannot be consumed by you. This can be eaten by you. This cannot be eaten by you. This can be tasted by you. This cannot be tasted. This can be drunk. This cannot be drunk. You can consume what is allowable. You cannot consume what is not allowable. You can eat what is allowable. You cannot eat what is not allowable. You can taste what is allowable, but you cannot taste what is not allowable. You can drink what is allowable, but you cannot drink what is not allowable. You can consume food within the proper time. You cannot consume food outside the proper time. You can eat within the proper time. You cannot eat outside the proper time. You can taste food within," and so on and so forth.

These new monks think to themselves, "Well, when we were lay people, we consumed what we liked and did not consume what we did not like. We ate what we liked and did not eat what we didn't like, tasted what we liked," and so on and so forth. "It seems these monks put a muzzle on our mouths." So, of course, they revert to the lay life—here it's got low life.

The Buddha sees... remember, when the Buddha talks about the low life or the lay life, he's usually meaning the indulgence in sense pleasures, which of course, as a lay person, you don't have to be like that. That's what it's referring to. Such a person is one who has forsaken the training and reverted, frightened by the fear of crocodiles. Crocodiles is the term for gluttony.

There's the fear of whirlpools. Again, somebody's come away with grief and despair and all that. After he's gone forth, when it is morning, he dresses, takes his bowl, and goes into a village or town for alms with body unguarded, his speech unguarded, with mindfulness unestablished, and with sense faculties unrestrained. He sees some householder there or householder's son, furnished and endowed with the five cords of sensual pleasure, enjoying themselves. He considers, "Well, formerly when I was in the home life, we were furnished and endowed with the five cords of sensual pleasure. We enjoyed ourselves. My family has wealth. I can both enjoy wealth and make merit." Because of this, they leave the monastic life because they are frightened by the fear of whirlpools. Whirlpools is a term for the five sensual pleasures.

Remember, the Buddha in the scriptures usually, when he's talking about the low life rather than the lay life—I shouldn't have said lay—the low life, he's talking about a life devoted to sensual pleasure.

What is the fear of sharks? Again, people have gone forth. These men have gone forth. They've become monastics. Then again, they've dressed and gone in with the robe and bowl. They've gone into the village for alms with body unguarded, speech unguarded, mindfulness unestablished, and with sense faculties unrestrained. He sees a woman lightly dressed, and when he sees such a woman, lust infects his mind. Because his mind is infected by lust, he forsakes the training and reverts to the low life, frightened by the fear of sharks. Sharks is the term for women.

Now before the women start throwing brickbats, remember he's talking about the mind of the monk. Remember that we are creating our own worlds, and when we see somebody whom we are sexually attracted to, then that is something that we are creating within ourselves, and it's our response of lust which is the problem. He doesn't mean, of course, that women are sharks. If he were talking to nuns, it would have been the men who were sharks. I'm an apologist for the Buddha, you see.

These are the four kinds of fears to be expected by certain persons who've gone forth from the home life into homelessness in this *dhamma* and discipline. Of course, all these things are applicable to everybody who's on the spiritual path. If you're on a spiritual path, then obviously there are angry despair, gluttony, being devoted to sensual pleasure, and of course the biggest, the most attractive of all sensual pleasures is sex. Sex, drugs and rock and roll. We have to keep guarded against such things, obviously.

I'm sure you're all adepts at being guarded from such things, and that by your continued practice and devotion you will achieve full liberation from all suffering sooner rather than later.

So we can do some practice.