Good evening. I trust you've had a fruitful day. I don't say happy, though I hope it has been a happy day.

*Namo tassa bhagavato arahato samma sambuddhasa*. Homage to the Buddha, the Blessed, Noble and Fully Self-Awakened One.

It's odd how it feels colder even though the temperature is just about the same when it gets damp. That's the way it is.

Today, I thought we'd look at number 47. It's called "The Inquirer." The Buddha encourages people to inquire as to whether he really is truly liberated or not, truly enlightened. So he's back in Savatthi at Anathapindika's park, Jeta's grove.

He says someone who's an inquirer, not knowing how to gauge another's mind—in other words, how to read another's mind, another's heart—should make an investigation of the *Tathagata* in order to find out whether or not he's fully awakened. Remember, the word *Tathagata* was how he referred to himself. You can translate it as the transcendent one, "gone there"—that's how it translates.

Now the listeners say, "Oh, our teachings are rooted in the Blessed One, guided by the Blessed One, have the Blessed One as their resort. It would be good if the Blessed One would explain the meaning of these words."

"Well, listen up," he's an Americanism, says the Buddha.

So someone who is an inquirer, not knowing how to read another person's mind, should investigate the *Tathagata* in respect to two states: states cognizable through the eye and through the ear. In other words, watch the *Tathagata* and listen to what he says.

"Are there found in the *Tathagata* defiled states that can be recognized?" And when he does this, he'll come to recognize that there are no defiled states in the Blessed One.

But then he must investigate further. "Are there found in the *Tathagata* any mixed states cognizable by the eye or through the ear that they can see and hear?" So mixed state means one minute he's the Buddha and next minute he's not. In a sense, that's the way we are. Sometimes I'm Buddha and sometimes I'm definitely not. So no mixed states can be found in the *Tathagata*.

Then he says you must investigate further. "Are there found in the *Tathagata* cleansed states that you can see and upon hearing the Buddha you can hear?" So of course there are cleansed states—in other words, virtue.

Now when he comes to this, he investigates further. "Has he had this for a long time or did he attain it recently?" And the answer is the Venerable One has attained this wholesome state over a long time.

So now this puts big question marks on people who have sudden enlightenment and go around saying that they're fully liberated. The 60s and 70s were full of such people, gurus. In other words, the Buddha stresses here that you don't become awakened just as soon as you wake up in the morning.

Now you must investigate further. "Has the Venerable acquired renown and attained fame so that the dangers connected with renown and fame are found in him?" So once somebody becomes famous, do we see any pride, any conceit, any arrogance, the abuse of power, the abuse of his students? No, this is not to be found in the Buddha.

Then you must investigate further. "Is the Venerable One restrained without fear or restrained by fear? Does he avoid indulging in sensual pleasure because he is without craving through the destruction of craving?" That's an interesting point. Is he pretending to be restrained or is it because all fear has gone? So that's a difficult one to get at. You'd have to catch the person. And not indulging in sensual pleasures because there is no more craving, no more craving or identifying with anything which is pleasurable. So one has to observe carefully, one has to stay with somebody for quite some time.

There's a story about Ajahn Chah who had heard about this arahant and he went to stay with him. Seemingly he was with him for quite some time and was of the growing opinion that maybe this monk was indeed fully liberated. And then one day, just by happenstance, he saw him give this great dog a great kick because the dog had taken a piece of meat off the table. So I think he left after that.

So he must investigate even further. If others should ask you, "What are the Venerable One's reasons? What are your reasons? And what is your evidence for saying that this Venerable One is restrained without fear, not restrained by fear? He avoids indulging in sensual pleasures because he is without craving and the destruction of craving?"

Then they should answer, "Whether the Venerable One dwells in the Sangha or not, while some there are well-behaved and some are ill-behaved and some there teach a group, while some here are seen concerned with material things and some are unsullied by material things, still that venerable one does not despise anyone because of that."

So in other words, one attribute of a fully liberated person is that instead of being angry or despising somebody who can't keep the rules or isn't well behaved, instead he would look upon them with compassion. They are spiritually sick.

Now he should question the *Tathagata* even further. So now what we have is a passage where this is repeated and the Buddha now replies on his own behalf.

"There are no defiled states cognizable through the eye or through the ear found in the *Tathagata*. There are no mixed states cognizable through the eye or through the ear found in the *Tathagata*"—in other words, one minute is good and the next minute is bad.

"Now, are there found in the *Tathagata* cleansed states cognizable through the eye, through the ear?" "Yes," the Buddha replies. "They are my pathway and my domain, yet I do not identify with them." That's a clear point of non-identification with those beautiful virtues of compassion, love, sympathetic joy, etc.

A disciple should approach the teacher who speaks to us in order to hear the Dhamma. The teacher teaches him the Dhamma with its higher and higher levels, with its more and more sublime levels, with its dark and bright counterparts. As the teacher teaches Dhamma to the bhikkhu in this way, through direct knowledge of a certain teaching here in that Dhamma, the bhikkhu becomes—or the listener comes to the conclusion about the teachings. He places confidence in the teacher: thus the Blessed One is fully enlightened, the Dhamma is well proclaimed by the Blessed One, and the Sangha is practicing the good way.

Now, if others should ask you, "What are the Venerable One's reason and what is his evidence that the Blessed One is fully enlightened?" they should answer, "Here, friends, I approached the Blessed One in order to hear the Dhamma. The Blessed One taught me the Dhamma with its higher and higher levels, with its more and more sublime levels, with its dark and bright counterparts. As the Blessed One taught the Dhamma to me in this way, through direct knowledge of a certain teaching here in that Dhamma, I came to the conclusion that I am under teachings and I place confidence in the Buddha."

Now, when anyone's faith has been planted, rooted and established in the *Tathagata* through these reasons, terms and phrases, his faith is said to be supported by reasons, rooted in vision and firm. It is invincible by any recluse or Brahmin or God or Mara or anyone in the world. This is how an investigation of the *Tathagata* in accordance with the Dhamma, and this is how the *Tathagata* is well investigated according to the Dhamma.

Now, what this is interpreted by in the commentaries is that at this point of stream entry—so at the point of stream entry, remember, a person actually intuits *Nibbāna*. He has a direct experience of *Nibbāna*. And then, of course, that dispels all doubt, because what was before something that he had heard, that he had thought about, that he was practicing towards, he now has as a personal experience. And in that sense, his faith is rooted.

If you go back to those thirty-seven *bodhipakkhiya dhamma*—I forget how you translate that now—the thirty-seven constituents of the Dhamma, there were five of the spiritual faculties: faith, effort, awareness, concentration, and wisdom. And these were said to become a *bala*, a strength, an invincible strength, once you'd attained the first path and fruit.

So that is the primary aim of all meditators: to intuit *Nibbāna*. If you haven't done so yet, then I'm sure you will, given your determination to liberate yourselves from suffering sooner rather than later.

So we can do a little sitting.