Good evening. I trust you had a fruitful day. I did not say happy. I hope it has been happy.

*Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammā-sambuddhassa.* Homage to the Buddha, the blessed, noble and fully self-awakened one.

So we're tackling this problem of *kamma*. Let me repeat the basic phrase that the Buddha uses, the basic formula. Beings are owners of their actions. You own it. You are heir to your actions. Whatever consequences there are, they'll be yours. They originate from their actions. In other words, you're born of your actions, moment after moment. You're bound to them. You're chained to your actions. And your actions are your refuge, hopefully a good refuge. It is action that distinguishes between inferior and superior.

Now you have to remember these are very broad brushstrokes. If some man or woman were to go around killing murderers, bloody handed, given to blows and violence, if we did that all our lives, then we will surely end up in a dreadful place. But we don't do that all our lives. It's a big mixture. We also like to abstain from such things and take care of animals. So our lives are a balance between those things that are unskilful and those things that are skilful. So it becomes impossible to say what our destiny is, except in that broadest way that if we've been generally good, we should be okay. Breathe easy.

What I want to centre on tonight is the fact that not everything that happens to us is our personal *kamma*. So that's very important. Although the Buddha did not formalise this, these sections are taken from what he spoke at various times during his lifetime, and they're called *niyama* or laws.

The first one is to do with *utu*, which is the season's energy. So it's to do with physics, chemistry, etc. It's to do with the mineral world. As you know, for instance, we had a few years ago that terrible tsunami that killed many people. So it would be foolish for those people to think, or foolish people to think, that those people who drowned must have done something terrible in their past lives. When we're born on the earth, we are subject to the physics of the earth, the chemistry of the earth. Now when it comes to climate crisis, that's something else because there we are definitely explicitly involved. But when it comes to just natural disasters and we may be caught up in them, then it's just one of those things that we have to accept is part of the risk of becoming a human being.

The next one is *bīja*, which means seed. So that's all our genetics. Again, it would be very wrong to think that somebody who was born with a hereditary disease somehow deserves it. That would be completely wrong because we know that our genes are coming up from who knows where, and we've ended up with this particular combination. So there's not much to do with personal *kamma* there. Although it's understood that the mind can have an effect on the body, definitely I don't think it would be right to think of hereditary diseases or something that happens at birth through the birth process whereby the body is injured in some way as being personal *kamma*. What would be personal *kamma* is how we relate to the body that we're in. The actual body itself is what is given to us by our genes.

Then there comes *kamma*, which we're actually going into. So that's the moral level of the universe. And that's really to do with how we feel inside ourselves, the meaningfulness of our lives, our happiness is very much tied in to our goodness. Although not necessarily. If you're a sadist, then you might find some happiness in torturing people. So it's not always clear, clean cut. But what we can say is that whatever is not beneficial to us, not beneficial to others, or to both, will lead to an unhappy place, an unhappy place within us.

There are examples that come to mind. If you remember the terrible Moors murders that went back in the 60s, Brady and Myra Hindley. So she seems to have come to some sort of forgiveness about it by being a Christian. But Brady went mad eventually, and seems to have been okay. He got his mind back a bit. And when he was asked, did he ever think about the murders of those boys and girls? He says if he did, it would drive him mad. So obviously something was boiling in him. And that would manifest in his later, in his rebirth. He will be reborn, in Buddhist terms, and that will manifest. He'll have to work through that *kamma*.

It's the same even when you think of Stalin, Hitler, Pol Pot, all these people that we know have perpetrated tremendous evils. They themselves will have to suffer the consequences of that.

Then there's *Dhamma*, the law of *Dhamma*, the spiritual law. So this is the Four Noble Truths, basically, and everything that comes out of the Four Noble Truths. So that comes pretty straightforward. And involved in that is our *kamma*. It's all to do with understanding how we create suffering, how we undermine that sense of suffering or unsatisfactoriness and liberate ourselves.

The final one is *citta*. So I've left that finally. Normally it doesn't come in the order that I've given. The *citta* is the heart mind. In the old days, you would have referred to it as the soul. The spirit was something else. So the closest word would be something like psyche, both the heart and mind, emotional and thought life. And a lot of it is given, the way we perceive things. If you're born with poor hearing, then you won't hear so well. If you're born with colour blindness, you'll see the world in a different way than other people see it. So the actual basis of contact with the world is also given to us. And what we do with it inside is also to do very much with just our whole basic psychology. Behind that we have this relationship of wanting, not wanting.

With this terrible murder of George Floyd, the question of social *kamma* comes into play. And anybody who sees that, I was trying not to see it, but my brother sent me the transcript of what he was pleading for, and I did actually go and watch it. Well, it's beyond words, isn't it? And what can we say? When we are born, we are born into a society and we are given, whether we like it or not, the ignorances, the delusions and the biases and the prejudices of that society.

In a sense, that prejudice remains within us as just a delusion. That's how we think. So every nation, every tribe thinks of itself as superior to others. And that sense of superiority is just an extension of the self, an extension of the ego, of me. And what the self does is it creates a fence, it creates a barrier, and it feels safe when it has other people within the same corral. So you've got lots of little egos, little selves all together supporting each other. And so the prejudices, the delusions of that society are maintained.

Our job, our purpose is to really recognise a prejudice when it comes into our consciousness. And we may be slightly disturbed by how prejudicial we might be, just caught here and there in certain circumstances, racial prejudice, sexism and all that. And we have to be careful because we have this self-esteem which says, oh, I'm not this, I'm not that. But when it comes up, you have to be quite honest to ourselves. It's impossible for people, for anybody in society not to be prejudiced. It's just part of our makeup.

Our purpose in terms of purifying our heart is to, first of all, really accept that everybody's prejudiced one way or the other in all these fields and to actually accept it. And then to recognise, to be sharp when it appears always first in the mind and to point to it and say, well, that's prejudiced, that's judgmental, and not to indulge it.

Then very slowly it has less and less an effect. If something is repressed within us then it will manifest anyway, Freudian slips and all that. And Jung said something I thought was a tremendous profundity: he said whatever is repressed will manifest as fate. In other words, whether you like it or not, all our suppressed feelings, all our repressed prejudices and feelings are actually having an effect on the way we are moving now, affecting the way that we relate to people, the way that we're working, the way that we're in the world.

They've done all sorts of studies during my time when I was a teacher about the way that teachers quite unconsciously treat girls and boys differently, how they treat people from ethnic groups, whether they are black people or Indians or coloured people, and white people, depending on whether the teacher themselves is white or otherwise. So all that's been heavily studied and quite well known. And it's up to the teacher then to recognise those biases and not allow it to distort their teaching.

So it's a really very difficult area for us to really be very truthful to ourselves about our own prejudices and to allow ourselves to be honest about it. And then to make that decision, well, I'm not acting on it. So if we're not acting on it, there's no consequence. This is the law of *kamma*. So whatever the desire is in this particular discussion about prejudice, whatever that desire is, so long as it remains as some idea, some intention in the mind, nothing's happened. That's really important to grasp.

So there's no reason to feel guilt about it. There's no reason to feel shame about it. It's not necessary to do that. It's just necessary to say, oh, this is it. That's a racial thought. That's a sexist thought and so on. And to just stay above it, just to stay with it and allow it to die away. And if we do get caught up in thoughts about it, to really pull ourselves off it and recognise it, sink into the heart, and to be kind to ourselves, and to be able to forgive ourselves, to actually say to ourselves, well, that's part of my upbringing.

That will always be there, and this may come as a surprise. Those little conditionings will be there even if we are fully liberated. They're known as *vāsanā*. These *vāsanās* are leftover traces of conditionings. But in somebody who is liberated, it's impossible for them to be caught up in it. But they remain in the mind. They will actually appear in given circumstances.

So recognising that is basically our job: to be aware of any negativity especially prejudices and so on and so forth and to just be honest about it. And there's no shame for that, there's no guilt. That's just part of the baggage that we end up being given when we're born into a society.

This dreadful occasion, which I hope, people are saying that it may have a real fundamental change in America and across the world, hopefully. It's funny how something like that in plain sight can be truly shocking. I remember the Vietnam War, that picture, I'm sure you all remember it, the picture of that young girl, there were lots of them running, but there was that young girl, that naked young girl burning with napalm on her back from a bomb. And that picture was just so shocking that I think it wasn't long after that that the Americans pulled out of Vietnam. So it's good to sit with these sorts of things and just bear with the horror of it really.

I can only hope my words have been of some assistance and that through all of our efforts to actually perceive what is unwholesome in us and not to activate it, not to act upon it, we will slowly liberate our hearts from all this negativity and become fully liberated from all suffering sooner rather than later.