*Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhasa. Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhasa. Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhasa.*

Homage to the Buddha, the blessed, noble and fully self-awakened one.

This is the inaugural talk around verses of the *Dhammapada*, and I've chosen what is probably the most famous of them all. I shall chant it in Pali first, just to give it that Eastern flavour.

*Na hi verena verāni sammantīdha kudācanaṃ, averena ca sammanti esa dhammo sanantano.*

As usually translated: "Hatreds never cease through hatred in this world; through love alone they cease. This is an eternal law." So this is basically a statement of non-violence.

Now with each of these *Dhammapada* verses, there comes a little story. I'm very fortunate to have this book written by Sri Dhammananda, who was a Sri Lankan monk in Malaysia. He's died now. What he's done for us very kindly is he's reduced the stories to something fairly manageable. So I shall read this as an example of the way they would have thought, or the way it was built up from perhaps a smaller original occasion.

So it's a bitter feud through various existences. Once there lived a householder whose wife was barren. Being unable to bear a child and afraid that she would be mistreated by her husband and her mother-in-law, she herself selected and arranged for her husband to marry another woman. But on two occasions, as soon as she knew the second wife was pregnant, the barren wife gave her food mixed with drugs, causing her to have miscarriages. On her third pregnancy, the fruitful wife kept it to herself without informing the barren wife. But when the latter came to know of it, she again caused a miscarriage. Eventually, the second wife died in childbirth. Before her death, the unfortunate woman was filled with hatred and vowed vengeance on the barren wife and her future offspring. Thus, the feud was started.

Among their later existences, the two were born as a hen and a cat, a doe and a leopardess, and finally as the daughter of a nobleman in Savatthi and an ogress. One day, the demon was in hot pursuit of the noble lady's daughter and her baby. When the lady heard that the Buddha was giving a religious discourse at the Jetavana monastery, she fled to him and placed her son at his feet for protection. The demon was thus prevented from entering the monastery. She was later called in and both lady and ogress were admonished by the Buddha. The Buddha told them about their past feud as rival wives and how they had been harbouring hatred towards each other and killing each other's offspring through their various lifetimes. They were made to see that hatred could only cause more hatred and it could only cease through friendship, understanding and goodwill. Both realised their mistakes and on the admonition of the Buddha made their peace with each other.

The Buddha then requested the woman to hand over her son to the ogress. Fearing for the safety of her son, she hesitated, but because of her devotion and confidence in the enlightened one, she handed over her son as directed. The child was warmly received by the ogress. After kissing and caressing the child tenderly, like her own son, the ogress handed over the child back to his mother. As a result of this episode there was much goodwill on both sides.

I don't know, maybe there was a kernel incident there where a desperate husband went to the Buddha and said, "My two wives are at each other all day, can you help?" and then it built up from there. An ogress is a nasty female Shrek, I suppose.

But the story is basically about what happens when you react with hatred or anger to somebody else who's being angry or hateful. Now, what we have to do is convince ourselves that this is true. I think the place to start is within ourselves.

If you think about what happens within us when somebody is angry with us or has a hateful attitude towards us, the response is immediately to react with that anger, to react with hatred. You can see that this is just going to create more hatred and more anger because the other person now has something to chew on. As they respond with more hatred and anger, so we respond with more hatred and anger. That's a never-ending process, which is just going to lead to a forest fire.

It's really catching that within us. Often for no reason, we might just dislike somebody. That manifests in the way we look at them, the way we actually talk to them. Then we wonder why they're coming back to us, not recognising that inside us, we have a very hateful attitude towards this person. It could be because of their political stance, their religious stance. It could be for any reason. It could be just the way they look sometimes.

Hatred is a generalised attitude that passes through time. Anger, of course, is just a flare-up which tends to die away. Of course, you can bring it back to mind over and over again when we're daydreaming. But basically, these two mental heart reactions are something that we build up within ourselves. They're looking for something to really chew on. When the other person actually reacts to us with anger or with further hatred, then we ourselves find a reason to just continue. And so the feud begins.

Now, there's an incident in the Buddha's life where the dastardly Devadatta set a wild elephant on him. Devadatta wanted to reform the order, to go back to its original ascetic practice – robes made from rags, living in just a shelter made from twigs or trees with a banana leaf put over it, really going right back to those early ascetic days. Of course, the Buddha wouldn't accept that because the people who were ordained then just weren't really of that calibre. So he set this wild elephant on the Buddha.

When the Buddha saw the elephant coming, he raised his hand. It's known as the *abhaya* posture, the fearless posture. That's the first thing that we have to engender towards somebody who's hateful or who's angry with us. Somehow there has to be a feeling that they cannot destroy you, they cannot overwhelm you. There has to be that internal strength within us.

Now that might not be there, in which case we'll react in a way which is undermining ourselves. We'll either run or hide or give in to the person who's being angry with us. This is a learning process. The thing is to build up a certain righteousness within ourselves so that we can stand steady within ourselves, a certain assertiveness about ourselves within the world. That's difficult.

So the elephant comes towards him and he holds his hand up. This hand is also a way of him expressing his love towards the elephant, a non-violent love towards the elephant, asking the elephant to calm down. It's a feeling he's sending out, a beam of love. The elephant does slow down and finally pays obeisance.

Whether we want to believe these stories or not isn't really the point. The point is that we can overcome anger, other people's anger, other people's hatred, by non-reactivity and this idea of goodwill. Friendliness might not be there, but definitely we can have goodwill.

When somebody comes to us with that attitude of hatred and anger, it's because something is unhappy within them and they are expressing that outwards as an aggressive mental state, an aggressive mood. It's a case of recognising that.

What might we do if somebody is like that towards us? Well, we might be quick enough to envisage this hand so that we're receiving the emotional state, and that's being taken care of. Even though we might feel inside us a certain anger growing or a certain fear growing, it's as though the hand is also guarding us against further reactions because it's holding the other person at a distance.

In order to prevent us falling into the emotion that we're engendering in ourselves, if we lift our attention and pay attention to what they're saying – in other words, to put the attention on the ear rather than the heart – then what we're doing is we're being compassionate. We're actually taking a position that maybe if I can get in touch with the hurt that sits behind their hatred or their anger, it might undermine it. That's an act of compassion, an act of trying to understand where the person is coming from.

Hopefully the other person will suddenly recognise that actually you're listening to them. That often undermines a person's anger and hatred, that finally you're actually paying attention to what their problem is. That often assuages the whole situation. Then through discussion there can be a healing of the situation. That's definitely one way that you can approach a situation where a person is angry or is hateful towards you.

So we have this story of the ogress and these three qualities of friendship, understanding – that's the compassion – and goodwill. We have the story of the Buddha overcoming the elephant. Here we have some stories to support us, but also through our own internal investigation. When we're angry and the other person's angry, before we know it, we're into some rage.

This whole attitude of non-violence is of absolute importance in our lives so that we can heal our own hearts of that reactivity of anger and hatred. If we go back to this little phrase, it's very simple. We can translate it as: "Hatred or anger never comes to end with the reaction of hatred and anger. Not in this world, not ever, not at any time. It's only through goodwill, through understanding compassion that they come to cease." This is an eternal law. This is an absolute law.

I can only hope my words have been of some assistance, that they have not caused even greater confusion. And that by your devotion to the practice, you will be liberated from all suffering sooner rather than later.