Good evening all. I trust you've had a fruitful day. I don't say happy, of course, although I hope it has been happy.

*Namo Tassa Bhagavato Arahato Samma Sambuddhassa. Namo tassa bhagavato arahato samma sambuddhassa. Namo tassa bhagavato arahato samma sambuddhassa.* Homage to the Buddha, the blessed, noble and fully self-awakened one.

By the way, I've softened the language of the Metta Sutta. I think I got fed up with all these shoulds, like I think a lot of you might have done. It's only a translation after all. So I hope you like my rephrasing of it later on.

Yesterday we talked about friendship and there was this business of ready to die for a friend. So this is something else which also brings up a different type of death. This is called the advice to Channa.

On that occasion the venerable one, they were staying in the Bamboo Grove, which is a very regular place at Rajgir, the capital near Rajgir, the capital of Magadha which is on the Ganges there. And the Venerable Channa was living with him on Vulture's Peak. Vulture's Peak was where the Buddha gave many of his talks.

Now, on that occasion, the Venerable Channa was afflicted, suffering and gravely ill. And when it was evening, the Venerable Sariputta rose from meditation, went to the Venerable Mahachunda and said to him, "Friend Chunda, let's go and visit Channa and ask about his illness." And then after they do so, and after the exchange greetings with him, when the courteous and amiable talk was finished, they sat to one side and said, "I hope you're getting well, friend Channa," says Sariputta. "I hope you're comfortable. I hope your painful feelings are subsiding and not increasing, and that their subsiding, not their increase, is apparent." So I hope you're getting well, and I hope it's obvious to you you're getting well.

"Venerable brother, I'm not getting well. I'm not comfortable. My painful feelings are increasing, not subsiding. The increase and not their subsiding is apparent to me. I shall use the knife." So this is one way of saying he's going to commit suicide. "I have no desire to live."

"Let the Venerable Channa not use the knife. Let the Venerable Channa live. We want the Venerable Channa to live. If he lacks suitable food, I'll go in search of suitable food for him. If he lacks suitable medicine, I'll go in search of suitable medicine for him. If he lacks proper attendant, I will attend him. Let the Venerable Channa not use the knife."

So here's Sariputta pleading with him.

"Friend Channa, it is not that I do not have suitable food or a proper attendant, but rather that the teacher who is long worshipped by me with love, not without love, for it is proper for the disciple to worship the teacher with love and not without love. Friends, Sariputta, remember this: the *bhikkhu* Channa will use the knife blamelessly."

So in other words, it would be a dishonour to the teacher to do something which would disgrace him, to do something which he would definitely tell you not to do. But Channa says, no, I will commit suicide in a blameless way.

"We would ask the Venerable Channa certain questions." By the way, the fact that he said blamelessly is suggesting he's fully liberated. Because there is another occasion where an *arahant*, who is also in great pain from illness, says to the Buddha, "I'm going to take the knife." That's how they would put it. And the Buddha says, "Do as you see fit." The Buddha wouldn't take moral decisions for other people.

"Friend Channa, do you regard the eye, eye consciousness and things cognisable through eye consciousness as 'mine', 'this I am', and 'this is myself'?" And he goes through all the senses and the heart mind. And of course, the question is, is there still any identity within you with the psychophysical organism?

And his reply is, "I regard that the eye and eye consciousness, things cognisable through... all that are not mine, not I, not myself." So he's saying that he is.

And then Sariputta says, "What have you seen? What have you directly known?" So he's questioning him now because he's not sure that this monk is actually fully liberated. You can overestimate your attainments. "What have you seen? What have you directly known by your direct experience?" This is the point.

And he replies, "It is through seeing cessation, through directly knowing cessation in the eye," and so on and so forth. So, in other words, it's the point where the whole of the psychophysical organism, as it were, drops away and you are left with the Buddha within. That's what he's saying, cessation.

Now, when this was said, Mahachunda also doesn't believe that he's actually fully liberated. So he says, "Therefore, friend, and now this instruction of the Blessed One is to be constantly given attention: there is wavering in one who is dependent; there is no wavering in one who is independent. When there is no wavering, there is tranquillity. When there is tranquillity, there's no bias. When there's no bias, there's no coming and going. When there's no coming and going, there's no passing away and reappearing. And where there's no passing away and reappearing, there is no more here, nor beyond, nor in between. This is the end of suffering."

So you have to rely on the commentary which *Bhikkhu* Bodhi gives at the back of the book to understand this. So he says wavering—wavering, of course, is moving from desire and then not desire, falling into the wrong sorts of desires and then coming out. That's wavering. But somebody who's fully liberated doesn't waver. There's none of that wrong desire left in them.

Now, when, of course, there's no wavering, there's absolute tranquillity. There's no restlessness in the system. And when there's tranquillity, that also means that there's no view or opinion of "I'm right and everybody else is wrong." There's no ego there. There's no sense of pride.

Now, when there's no sense of pride and there's no self, then, of course, there's no coming and going. That's just another way of saying rebirth. Coming from one birth and going again. And when there's no rebirth, there's no passing away and reappearing. That's just another way of saying it. And when there's no passing away and reappearing, then there is no here, no beyond or in between. In other words, you're transcendent of all the phenomenal and physical world. And that, of course, is the Buddha. And this is the end of suffering.

Then when Venerable Sariputta and Venerable Chunda had advised this Venerable Channa thus, they rose from their seats and went away. Soon after they'd gone, the Venerable Channa used the knife.

Then Venerable Sariputta went to the Blessed One, paying homage to him, sat to one side. "Venerable sir, the Venerable Channa has used the knife. What is his destination? What is his future course?"

So the Buddha was able to see where people were born. That was one of his clairvoyant abilities once he was liberated, that he could actually see where people were moving from realm to realm and so on.

"Sariputta, didn't the *bhikkhu* Channa declare to you his blamelessness?" So in other words, the Buddha is saying, "Well, didn't he say he was blameless? So he must be an *arahant*."

Now, there's a bit of confusion there because it's understood that in the discourses that it was during the moment that he was dying, when he realised what his rebirth would be because of this act, that he actually liberated himself from that desire and became an *arahant*.

And then there's some ill report about Channa. "Venerable sir, there's a Vajjian village called Pubbajira, and there the Venerable Channa had families that were friends, families that were his intimates, families that were blameworthy." In other words, they're doing naughty things. And there's a suggestion that he was far too intimate with them, that he hadn't actually let go of the household life, of the sensual life.

Then the Buddha replies, "There are those families that were friends of *Bhikkhu* Channa, Sariputta, families that were his intimates, families that were blameworthy. But I do not say that to this extent he was blameworthy. Sariputta, when one lays down his body and clings to a new body, that I say is blameworthy." Now, in other words, if somebody kills themselves for wrong reasons, commits suicide for wrong reasons, then of course they will be reborn. And that would be blameworthy. But there was none of that in *Bhikkhu* Channa. "*Bhikkhu* Channa used the knife blamelessly."

This is what the Blessed One said, and Venerable Sariputta was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.

So this brings up the whole discussion around suicide and whether there are any occasions when it would be right to take your own life. As you know, Buddhist culture is not so hard on suicide as Christian and the Abrahamic religion culture. Of course, you go to hell forever or worse. But suicide—say in Japan, when you do something wrong to the samurai code, you would of course put the knife, put the sword into your stomach and draw it across. That was *seppuku*. In times, the losing general would fall upon his sword. That was probably an easy way to go because the victorious general wouldn't treat him very well.

There is, of course, the women in Hinduism throwing themselves on the pyre of their husband as a manifestation of love. I mean, that's what it's meant to be. But it's also called *sati*, by the way. And there's also, if you remember, you might be old enough to remember the Vietnamese monk who set fire to himself during the Vietnamese war as a protest. And that was quite remarkable. You can probably see it still on YouTube, where the flames are engulfing and as his body leans to the left, his hand goes out ever so gently to right himself up. And, of course, he eventually burns to death. It's a remarkable thing.

There was a case at the vihara when I was there with my teacher, Dr. Rewa Tadama. And a man used to visit us who really had constant desire to commit suicide. And he used to carry a rope in the boot of his car, believe it or not. Anyway, eventually he did. And I asked my teacher, I said, "Bhante, what happens to somebody who commits suicide?"

"Oh," he said, "they'll keep doing it for about 100 lifetimes."

And I thought, well, that's a load of rubbish. But actually, when I thought about it, I thought, well, if a person has used suicide to escape something, to escape what is unwholesome, or to escape something that they can't handle, like shame, public shame or something like that, then, of course, it takes a lot of courage to kill yourself, I would say. And that means a tremendous amount of will. So there is within that person the habit that if I come across such and such an occasion, the habit will come up to escape it by way of death. So I understood that maybe once somebody has committed suicide, that it might roll on for a few lifetimes.

But obviously here we have a case where, and we have another case too, where an *arahant* actually commits suicide because the pain is unbearable. So in those days they wouldn't have had palliatives or anything like that. And it opens up the whole question about assisted dying and all that. And it's a question fraught with all sorts of arguments and all sorts of stuff.

One hopes for oneself that one is never put in a position where you feel you have to bring your own life to an end. It's not the best way to go. But taking the Buddhist stance that it's all to do with intention, why are you wanting to end your life? And there are certain illnesses which even today they don't have palliatives for which are just unbearable in their suffering. And so one has to have a certain understanding about that. And maybe that person in relieving themselves of that pain actually finds insight. So this is a case where that happens.

So it doesn't have this terrible thing about it, suicide, in Buddhist culture. So anyway, some thoughts to go by. If you go on to the Buddhist Journal, the Buddhist Ethical Journal, there's a big discussion there, especially with a man called Damien Keown, who's written an excellent book on Buddhist ethics.

So I think that's enough for the evening and we can begin our practice.