*Buddham pujemi, Dhammam pujemi, Sangham pujemi. Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa. Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa. Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa. Buddham saraṇam gacchāmi, Dhammam saraṇam gacchāmi, Saṅgham saraṇam gacchāmi. Dutiyampi Buddham saraṇam gacchāmi, Dutiyampi Dhammam saraṇam gacchāmi, Dutiyampi Saṅgham saraṇam gacchāmi. Tatiyampi Buddham saraṇam gacchāmi, Tatiyampi Dhammam saraṇam gacchāmi, Tatiyampi Saṅgham saraṇam gacchāmi. Pāṇātipātā veramaṇī sikkhāpadaṃ samādiyāmi. Adinnādānā veramaṇī sikkhāpadaṃ samādiyāmi. Kāmesumicchācārā veramaṇī sikkhāpadaṃ samādiyāmi. Musāvādā veramaṇī sikkhāpadaṃ samādiyāmi. Surāmeraya-majjapamādaṭṭhānā veramaṇī sikkhāpadaṃ samādiyāmi.*

Very good. So we can begin with a standing meditation.

Make sure you feel balanced, grounded, and lifting yourself up through the top of the head, standing tall. Spending a moment relaxing, relaxing the brow. Eyes lowered, unfocused. The jaw. If there's tension there, just clench the jaw and then relax. The shoulders, give them a squeeze. Hands joined in front or by the side, doesn't matter. Just whatever is comfortable.

So acknowledging the posture, the energised spine, lifting us up, everything else relaxed. Bring your attention to the soles of your feet. What can you feel there? Can you isolate the sensations of pressure? Can you do that with sensations of warmth or coolness?

And there are those subtle sensations that tell you what you're standing on—the hardness of wood, the softness, the sponginess of a carpet. Acknowledging how the sensations are constantly changing as the body rebalances itself, and acknowledge how these sensations arise, whether we want them to or not. They are not under our direct control.

So taking our time, let's come up the body, see what we can feel. Both inside and outside. And there are areas that seem to be void of any feeling. When you get to the abdomen, can you feel the breath there? Is there any tension in the area? Can you feel the breath in the stomach area? Just the natural breath. Any tension? Do you feel the breath in the chest? Do you have a shallow breath? Any tension? Shoulders still relaxed. The jaw. The brow. And when you get to the scalp scan it like you did the soles of your feet.

Now without moving your eyes, just become aware of what's outside you. Colours and shapes in front of you. Any sounds. The atmosphere of the room, presence of other people either in your home or your neighbours. So your attention is entirely out there. Now at the same time, bring in the in here. Both the inside and the outside.

So this is the bubble of our consciousness. This is the world we are actually experiencing moment after moment. This is our universe. And we can't get out of it. You can't get underneath it, over the top of it. You're always in the middle of it.

So we may as well relax, just relax into this present moment, wide awake. In this mode we can let go of ideas of achieving something. That's the mode of doing, doing something now for some future result. But in this mode, just being, this is the result.

Relaxing, abiding in the present moment, wide awake. In this mode, just being, there's no future. There's only this ever-presenting moment. We're never going anywhere. We've always arrived.

Relaxing, abiding in the present moment, wide awake. In this mode just being, we're not reacting, we're not responding. It's as though we are nobody. Anonymous. Relaxing, abiding in the present moment wide awake. Achieving nothing, going nowhere, being nobody.

In this mode we're developing five of the seven factors that lead to liberation. There's the awareness of course. And there's the steadiness of attention, and the effort needed just to maintain that steadiness. A sense of calmness. The quality of equanimity. Not coming from a fixed position, an opinion, very open-minded. Not coming from aversion, fear, greed or preference. Open-hearted. Open-minded, open-hearted.

When this is established, we bring in two further factors, a sense of inquiry and an investigation of the Buddha's teachings. But remember this mode is important in ordinary daily life. To stop like this after a phone call, after a meal, after a job. When we stop, we can feel what mood or mental state we are in. We might be happy, we might be feeling stressed. So just to feel that, just for a moment. And then we can see the next intention. And we have enough calmness to decide whether it's something we should do or something we shouldn't do. If it's something we shouldn't do, we should just stay with the feeling of desire until it comes to an end. If it's something we should do, then of course we should empower that desire.

So our next intention is to sit. Let's really take our time, be aware of every little movement it takes to get the body into a sitting posture. And you can use a little noting word just to keep the attention steady: pushing, pulling, lifting, placing.

So make sure you're comfortable, the spine in its natural position, just lifting up through the top of the head. And spending a few moments relaxing the brow. Eyes gently closed. Relaxing the jaw, lips together, teeth apart. Shoulders, if there's some tension, give them a good squeeze. And hands on your lap, whatever is comfortable. Just acknowledging the posture. If during the sitting it becomes tense, spend a moment relaxing. If you find that the body is slumping, then take a moment to lift up that energy.

Draw the attention now to the sensations caused by the breath. Preferable in the body, but if you're established at the nostrils, that's fine. Just placing the attention on the gentle sensations caused by the breath. Rising, falling. If the mind is wandering, as soon as you wake up note what it's doing. Planning, planning. Worrying, worrying. And then just draw the attention back to the breath. If you're feeling sleepy or tired, lift the spine, and you can open the eyes to let the lighting in, but keep the attention inward, resting the attention on the gentle sensations caused by the breath, allowing them to bring silence to the mind, calmness to the heart, stillness to the body.

Rising, falling. If the mind is wandering, recognise and acknowledge what it's doing. Thinking, thinking. Irritation, irritation. And bring the attention gently back to the breath. Feeling sleepy or tired, lift the spine, open the eyes.

As we become calmer, perhaps we can get closer to the breath, to catch the very beginning of the in-breath and feel it all the way to the very end. The very beginning of the out-breath, feel it all the way to the very end. If when you do that you feel you get tense, as it were, sit back within yourself and receive the information. Rising, falling.

If the mind is wandering just bring it gently back to the breath, acknowledge what's causing it to wander and then bring it back to the breath. Feeling sleepy or tired keep making that effort.

Once we feel somewhat concentrated, somewhat calm, we can open up to what is causing the mind to wander. If the mind is planning a holiday, I let those thoughts go. I'm not interested in the story. I come back into the body and feel the excitement, and wait till the excitement begins to fade away. If some worry comes up, let go of the story, come into the body and feel the anxiety, and wait for it to pass away. If there's nothing calling the attention, then come back to the breath.

It might be something physical. Some discomfort in the posture, some pain in the knee. So again, just feel those sensations and if it gets too much, change your posture, do it slowly.

So, beginning with the breath and then whatever draws the attention within the field of awareness. Whatever draws that attention is to be observed, to be felt, to be experienced. Beginning with the breath, rising, falling.

Becoming more aware of how we are reacting to what we are experiencing, how when something is pleasant we're drawn towards it, we want to maintain it, we want to develop it. When something is unpleasant, we don't want to feel it, we want to think of something else, we want to push it away, we want to reject it, we want to eliminate it. So this sort of desire, which is always manipulating the world in order to make us feel happy and comfortable—this is the cause of our attachments. The Buddha says this is the direct cause for our sufferings and unsatisfactoriness. Is that true for you?

Becoming more aware of how everything we're experiencing is arising and passing away. Everything appears only to vanish. Nothing ever repeats itself. Every breath is similar but not the same. Can you see anything that you can rely upon?

Becoming more aware of how everything I'm experiencing is an object. The observer is seeing something. The observer sees a thought or an image. The feeler can feel sensations and emotions. The experiencer experiences feelings, emotions and thoughts. You can make this distance more obvious to yourself, for instance if there is discomfort in the knees, you can say, there, there is discomfort, down there. So the observer, the feeler is up in the head and the feeling is down in the knee.

Same with an emotion. You can feel it in the body. It's an object. Even images you can see in front of you. And thoughts you can be aware of. So there's a distinction between the observer and the observed. The feeler and the felt, and the experiencer and what is being experienced. Can the perceiver be the perceived?

Becoming more aware of how everything we're experiencing is arising of its own accord. The body offers us sensations, whether we want it to or not. Pleasant and unpleasant. The heart offers us emotions, pleasant and unpleasant, whether we want it to or not. The mind is forever thinking and imagining whether we want it to or not. In this *Vipassanā* position everything is happening of its own accord. How can they be me?

Putting aside all instruction, have confidence that this intuitive awareness can understand things directly. Remember that childlike way of looking at things. Just observing, feeling, experiencing whatever draws the attention in the field of consciousness. Don't change anything, don't do anything.

When we come to the end of a sitting, it's good to reflect for a moment. How diligent were we at bringing ourselves back to the present moment? If I thought I was diligent, I will congratulate myself. If I thought I could have been more skilful, I will encourage myself. No need for self-criticism.

How did we deal with the various physical and mental states that arose? Were we experiencing a lot of dullness and lethargy? Or perhaps agitation? Or perhaps an obsessive thinking? How did we deal with it? If I thought I was skilful, I will congratulate myself. If I thought I could have been more skilful, I will encourage myself. No need for self-criticism.

Which of those three characteristics of existence was most obvious to us? The process of desiring which causes suffering and unsatisfactoriness. How everything is impermanent. And how everything is an object, not always under our direct control. Not me, not mine.

And it's good to make a resolution. Next time I feel sleepy and tired, I will open my eyes immediately.

And don't jump out of the sitting, open the eyes gently, let the light in. Very good.

*Muy bien. Muy bien.*