Good evening. I trust you've had a fruitful day. I do not say happy, but I hope it has been happy.

*Namo Tassa Bhagavato Arahato Sambha Sambho Tassa Namo Tassa Bhagavato Arahato Sambha Sambho Tassa Namo Tassa Bhagavato Arahato Sambha Sambuddhasa* — Homage to the Buddha, the blessed noble and fully self-awakened one.

So I wanted to carry on with Rāhula. There are three discourses to Rāhula. The last one was given to him when he was twenty-one plus. So you can't become a fully ordained monastic until you're twenty-one. Until you're twenty-one, you are a *sāmanera*, a lower ordination. And that one, he basically repeats the discourse on *anattā*, not-self. And it is said that after that, or shortly after that, or within a decent time after that, Rāhula becomes fully liberated. And the Buddha had the misfortune of having his son die before him, as, in fact, both his main disciples, Sāriputta and Moggallāna, died before him. So a bit of sadness there.

But at the age of around about eighteen, he gives him a second discourse, and this is called the Greater Discourse to Rāhula. So he's at Sāvatthi again, at the Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's Park. That's the one he bought off Prince Jeta with a field of gold, it seems.

When it was morning the Blessed One dressed and, taking his robe and bowl, set out for Sāvatthi, and Rāhula also dressed and, taking his robe, followed close behind the Blessed One. Then the Blessed One looked back and addressed Venerable Rāhula: "Rāhula, any kind of material form whatever, whether past, future or present, internal or external, gross or subtle, inferior or superior, far or near, all material form should be seen as it is with proper wisdom. This is not mine. This I am not. It's not me. And this is not myself."

Now Rāhula then says, "Only material form, Blessed One?" and the Buddha says, "No, no, there's also feeling, perception, habits of mental formation or volitional formations, and consciousness." So those are your five aggregates if you remember, but he didn't mention that — he only mentioned the body. So although he's put his material form, he's obviously talking to Rāhula about the body. So the body — past, future, present, gross, my body, other people's body, the whole thing should be seen as it is. This is not mine, doesn't belong to a me. It's not me and it's not myself.

Now, Rāhula says, "Who would go to town?" This he says to himself: "Who would go to town for alms today when personally admonished by the Blessed One?" Thus he turned back and sat down at the root of the tree, folding his legs crosswise, setting his body erect and establishing mindfulness.

So now it's obvious that at the age of eighteen, that dreadful devil and drugger's testosterone has got into him. And the Buddha's noticed that he has an eye out for likable objects, shall we say. And he's afraid that his son might return to the household life. And so he's now giving him instructions on how to overcome such desires.

Anyway, while he's sat there, Sāriputta sees him. And he says to him, "Rāhula, develop mindfulness of breathing. When mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated, it is of great fruit and great benefit."

Then when it was evening, the Venerable Rāhula rose from meditation, went to see the Blessed One. After paying homage, sat to one side. "Venerable sir, how is mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated so it is of great fruit and great benefit?"

And the Buddha replies, "Whatever internally belongs to oneself is solid, solidified and clung to." So in other words, he doesn't answer them. And seemingly what seems to have happened, according to the commentaries, is that Sāriputta, seeing him sat under a tree, gave him a little bit of a push and said, "Why don't you try mindfulness of breathing," not realizing the Buddha had actually given him an object already, which was, of course, the body.

So now the Buddha goes through the four elements. And so he starts off, of course, with the earth element. Whatever internally belonging to oneself is solid, clung to. Whatever is clung to — remember that, it's the *upādāna-khandha*, it's the five aggregates that are clung to, it's the clinging that's wrong. The blame cannot be put on the five aggregates — that's just the psychophysical organism. It's seeing it as a self, et cetera, which is the problem.

There is head hair, body hair, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bone, bone marrow, kidneys, heart, liver, diaphragm, spleen, lungs, large intestine, small intestines, contents of the stomach, feces and whatever else internally belonging to oneself is solid, solidified and clung to. That is the internal earth element. And then he says it should be seen simply as earth element — that solidity should be seen just as solidity. And when one sees it actually, it's proper wisdom. One becomes disenchanted — it loses its witchy craft over you. So disenchanted with it, and makes the mind dispassionate towards it. In other words, doesn't get caught up in the body.

So that's his first bit of advice. Then he looks at the water element — whatever it is, internal water. So whatever is watery and clung to: bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, grease, spittle, snot, oil of the joints, urine and whatever else there is. He doesn't let you off, does he? He gets down to the nitty gritty. And again, he says, you have to see it with proper wisdom. It's not mine. This is not what I am. And this is not myself. And again, when you see this as it really is, you become disenchanted. And your mind is dispassionate about what is the water element, actually. So dispassionate means non-attachment.

Then, of course, he says the fire element. The fire element, he said, whatever is internally belonging to oneself is fire, fiery and clung to. What is warmed and ages. So the fact of ageing is considered to be part of the heat and cold element and is consumed. That by which is eaten, drunk, consumed and tasted gets completely digested, and whatever else internally belonging to oneself is fire, fiery and clung to. And this again should be seen in the same way. It's not me, not mine, et cetera. And then we become dispassionate towards these things of the body and the mind cools.

Then there's the air element, of course. So whatever internally belongs to air or airiness: up-going winds and down-going winds, winds in the belly, winds in the bowel, winds that course through the limbs, in-breath and out-breath and whatever else belongs to the air or airy. So lots of wind there, both of the internal and external winds, should be seen as it is. It's just movement. It's just movement. And when one sees it actually is, then of course one becomes disenchanted and we arrive at dispassion, non-attachment.

And then the space element, which in Theravāda Buddhism isn't actually an element as such, but it does become so, I think, in the Mahāyāna tradition. But it's obviously there — space. The space element is either internal or external. So he says, whatever internally belongs to oneself is space or spatial and clung to. Holes in the ears, the nostrils, door of the mouth, the aperture whereby what is eaten, drunk, consumed and tasted gets swallowed and where it collects and whereby it is excreted from below. Whatever else is internally belonging to oneself is space, spatial, et cetera. And again, it's not mine. I am not that, and it doesn't constitute a self. In this way, we become disenchanted and dispassionate.

Now, having gone through a way of looking at the body by dividing it into its various elements, and therefore by that way of deconstructing it, losing that sense of attachment to our identity with it. Having done that, he now goes through them again, only this time to show how they can be used. So this is an instruction also to us.

"Develop meditation that is like the earth. When you develop meditation like the earth, arisen agreeable and disagreeable contacts will not invade the mind and remain." So there's your phrase with all these elements — if they are developed, if you develop meditation with that element as a simile or as a metaphor, then you'll find that both what is agreeable, what is attractive, and what is not attractive, what is disagreeable, will not invade the mind. So the mind here is *sati*. Will not invade the mind and remain. Actually, the mind here is what you're aware of. So in other words, this is one way of keeping at bay those particular thoughts.

"So just as people throw clean things and dirty things, excrement, urine, spittle, pus and blood on the earth, and the earth is not horrified, humiliated and disgusted because of that, so too, Rāhula, develop meditation like the earth. When you develop meditation like the earth, arisen agreeable and disagreeable contacts will not invade your mind and remain." So the *sati* has to keep, as it were, like the earth, to keep it solid, to keep it clean of all these things from entering into it — or a better way of putting that, from not allowing the awareness to become engaged in it, but to remain objective.

"Develop meditation like the water. For when you develop meditation like water, arisen agreeable and disagreeable contacts will not invade your mind and remain. Just as people wash clean things and dirty things, excrement, urine, spittle, pus and blood in water, and the water is not horrified, humiliated, and disgusted because of that, so too, Rāhula, develop this meditation like water." So again, he's talking about the awareness, being aware of something, but not attaching itself to it.

"Rāhula, develop meditation like fire. Just as people burn clean things and dirty things, excrement, urine, spittle, pus, blood in fire, and the fire is not horrified, humiliated and disgusted by that. Develop your meditation like a fire." So by doing this, of course, you stop these things invading your mind and remain there.

"Develop meditation like the air. So just as the air blows on clean things and dirty things, on excrement, urine, spittle, pus and blood, and the air is not horrified, humiliated and disgusted because of that, so develop your meditation like air."

So these are similes, these are metaphors that give Rāhula some idea of how to meditate, how to be objective within oneself, to investigate things, not to allow this awareness to get caught up in what is agreeable and disagreeable.

In the same way with space. Just as space is not established anywhere — just as space is not established anywhere, so it's everywhere. So too, Rāhula, meditation is like space. For when you develop meditation like space, arisen agreeable and disagreeable contacts will not invade your mind and remain.

So there you have an image of space or the awareness, the field of awareness, that space that we're aware of all around us. Sometimes it's very tiny, what we're aware of, and sometimes it's everything all around us. So to be spacious like that. That space does not cling onto anything. Things move through space, just as things move through our awareness.

So he's used, having got Rāhula to look at the body dispassionately as just elements — as you might say when your car, for instance, your mobile breaks and you're really upset about it. But when you separate it all into those little pieces and you see, what's the point of getting upset over a mobile, something like that. So having done that, he then uses the elements to give us an image of how we ought to meditate.

And then having done that, he then invites Rāhula to contemplate the four *Brahmavihāras*, the four illimitables: loving kindness or love, goodwill — I prefer goodwill — compassion, appreciative joy and equanimity.

And then having done that, so having undermined dispassion for the body — maybe he's eighteen, especially. So he's now dispassionate about the body. He now develops the heart into these wonderful states. And when that is done, he can now return to the body to look at the foulness of the body. "And when you develop meditation on foulness, any lust will be abandoned."

So if you remember, we went through this a while back where the Buddha had given a discourse about the foulness of the body to some monks. But somehow he hadn't softened it. He hadn't showed them how to balance it. And they'd gone off and got so upset about the foulness of the body, they'd committed suicide. And some of them had helped others to commit suicide. He was really upset by that.

So here he's actually undermining that possibility by having developed the good heart. So the body is to be let go of as a sensual — as a place of sensual delight as such, to indulging. The delight the body gives is quite natural, but to attach to it as "this is mine, me," et cetera, is going to cause problems, especially at this age. So any lust will be abandoned when you consider the foulness of the body, especially of that body that you're attracted to.

And then he says, after that, "Develop meditation on the perception of impermanence, because when you do that, the conceit of 'I am' is abandoned." So that's one good thing about observing impermanence, especially of oneself, the body, getting older and older and all that, and the fact that one is constantly changing. So every self that you create must be somebody else. So you start letting go. To see impermanence is to take away that sense of continuity which the self demands.

And then finally, when he's done all that, he can now go back to Sāriputta's suggestion. "A bhikkhu gone to the forest, to the root of a tree, sits down, folds his legs, body erect, establishes mindfulness before him, and begins to practice meditation on the breath." And then he goes through all — very quickly he goes through how to contemplate the breath, which we have done slightly with the discourse on how to establish mindfulness.

And then he finally says, "And even the final in-breath and out-breath, known as this is not known. This is how mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated so this is a great fruit and great benefit. When mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated in this way, even the final in-breaths and out-breaths are known as they cease, not unknown."

So in other words, our meditation is always about preparing for death. Every out-breath, every end of in-breath and every point of the end of an out-breath, these are moments when — these are endings. And so what the Buddha is saying is that this is also a preparation for our final breaths.

So that is the Greater Discourse on the advice to Rāhula. I think what we can try to remember is these images of using the elements, but how skillful it is. He's got a young man who's being tempted, and he first of all tells him to deconstruct the body, and then he tells him how to use those very same elements to have some image about what meditation is about, and then to develop the heart with love, with goodwill, compassion, et cetera. And then when that's done, to return to the body to see its foulness when lust is abandoned. Then finally, in the coolness, in the coolness of the new situation, he can develop mindfulness of breathing.

And it would seem that not long after this — this is when he's eighteen — so then he gave a further discourse, remember, when he was over twenty-one, when he was actually a fully ordained monastic, on not-self. That's what it was. I'm not going to read it because we've been through that sort of thing. And he becomes fully liberated. So there's hope for us all.

I hope the discourse has been of some benefit. And I can only hope that we, all of us, through our devotion to practice, will become liberated sooner rather than later.

Very good. So we can do a little practice.

*Dharam kujemi. Yama kujemi. Sangam kujemi. Namo Tassa Bhagavato Arahato Sambha Sambhudassa Namo Tassa Bhagavato Arahato Sambha Sambhudassa Namo Tassa Bhagavato Arahato Sambha Sambhudassa*

*Bodham Saranam Gacchami Dhammam Saranam Gacchami Sangam Saranam Gacchami Tutti Ampi Bodham Saranam Gacchami Tutti Ampi Dhammam Saranam Gacchami*

*Duthiyampi Sangam Saranam Gacchami Thathiyampi Budham Saranam Gacchami Thathiyampi Dhammam Saranam Gacchami Thathiyampi Sangam Saranam Gacchami*

*Anathipatha Vairamani Sikapada Samadhi Ami Adhinadana Vairamani Sikapada Samadhi Ami Kamesumicacara Vairamani Sikapada Samadhi Ami*

*Musa-vada-vairamani-sikapada-samadhi-ami sura-maraya-maja-pamadakana-vairamani-sikapada-samadhi-ami*

So make sure your body is the expression of the enlightened one, the awakened one. There's that energy in the lower back and the abdomen just lifting you up. Sitting tall. Just a moment now just to relax the brow. The jaw. Lips together, teeth apart. Shoulders. Hands on the lap, whatever is comfortable.

And acknowledging that posture. This body is subject to disease. This body is of a nature to fall ill. This body has not gone beyond sickness. This body is subject to ageing. This body has not gone beyond ageing. This body is now in a process of ageing. This body is subject to death. This body has not gone beyond death. This body will die.

There is the unborn, undying, uncreated, uncompounded. The unconditioned. True refuge, harbour and home. Perfect peace and contentment. Those who are mindful are in the presence of *Nibbāna*.

A moment of reflection.

Resolution

So make sure you feel comfortable to practice our contemplations. Speaking gently into our own hearts.

May I be free of physical pain.
May I be free of mental distress.
May I experience the bliss of liberation.

Bringing to mind someone we know who's having a hard time.

May you be free of physical pain.
May you be free of mental distress.
May you be liberated of all your sufferings.

And there are all those at this moment who are sick and suffering from mental illness. People in the process of dying and those who have died and left grieving family, relatives and friends. People going hungry, homeless and destitute. Those having to deal with severe personal and interpersonal difficulties. All those caught up in wars and repressive regimes. Those being tortured. And there are those suffering from natural disasters and climate crisis. All the sentient beings being cruelly treated and unnecessarily slaughtered. And all who find life meaningless.

May you be free of physical pain.
May you be free of mental distress.
May you be liberated of all your sufferings.

Radiating our compassion to all beings in all directions.

May all beings be free of physical pain.
May all beings be free of mental distress.
May all beings be liberated of all their sufferings.

Bringing to mind now moments of joyfulness we've experienced today, happiness, peacefulness.

May I be joyful.
May my joyfulness increase.
May I experience the bliss of liberation.

Bring to mind someone we know has caused to be joyful.

May you be joyful.
May your joyfulness increase.
May you experience the bliss of awakening.

And for all those at this moment who are content and happy with their lives, enjoying the warmth of friendships, delighting in art and nature, hobbies and so on, have meaningfulness in their work, enjoy the fruitfulness of their spiritual practice and rejoice in the success of others.

May you be joyful.
May your joyfulness increase.
May you experience the bliss of *Nibbāna*.

Radiating our joy to all beings in all directions.

May all beings be joyful.
May your joyfulness increase.
May you experience the bliss of *Nibbāna*.

Allow these words of the discourse on goodwill to flow through us.

If you are wise and want to reach the state of peace, you need to be upright, responsible, gentle and humble, easily contented, need only a few things. Not always be busy and have the right sort of work. You need to guard the senses and be modest. You do not have to be exclusively attached to only a few people. You shouldn't do the slightest thing that a wise person could blame you for.

Be thinking always: May all beings be happy.

Whatever living beings there are, be they weak or strong, big or small, large or slender, living nearby or far away, those who've already been born and those who've yet to be born. May all beings without exception be happy. Be truthful to one another and do not think anyone anywhere is of no value. Do not wish harm to anyone even when you're angry. Just as a mother would protect her only child at the risk of her own life, let the thought, let the warmth of your heart go out to all beings. Let your thoughts of love go through the whole world, above and below, without any barrier, with no ill will or hatred.

Whether you are standing, walking, sitting or lying down, so long as you're awake, develop this affectionate mindfulness. This, they say, is the noblest way to live. And if you do not fall into unskillful ways but live well and develop insight and are no longer attached to all the desires of the senses, then truly you'll never need to be reborn into this world again.

Please join me in the chant.

*Kāraṇīyam atthakusalena yan taṃ santaṃ padaṃ abhisamecca
Sakko ujū ca suhujū ca suvaco c'assa mudu anatimāni
Santussako ca subharo ca appakicco ca sallahukavutti
Santindriyo ca nipako ca appagabbho kulesu ananugiddho
Na ca khuddaṃ samācare kiñci yena viññū pare upavadeyyuṃ
Sukhino vā khemino hontu sabbe sattā bhavantu sukhitattā
Ye keci pāṇabhūtatthi tasā vā thāvarā vā anavasesā
Dīghā vā ye mahantā vā majjhimā rassakaṇukathūlā
Diṭṭhā vā yeva adiṭṭhā ye ca dūre vasanti avidūre
Bhūtā vā sambhavesī vā sabbe sattā bhavantu sukhitattā
Na paro paraṃ nikubbetha nātimaññetha katthaci naṃ kiñci
Byārosanā paṭighasaññā nāññamaññassa dukkhamiccheyya
Mātā yathā niyaṃ puttaṃ āyusā ekaputtamanurakkhe
Evampi sabbabhūtesu mānasambhāvaye aparimāṇaṃ
Mettañca sabbalokasmi mānasambhāvaye aparimāṇaṃ
Uddhaṃ adho ca tiriyañca asambādhaṃ averaṃ asapattaṃ
Tiṭṭhañcaraṃ nisinno vā sayāno vā yāvat'assa vigata-middho
Etaṃ satiṃ adhiṭṭheyya brahmametaṃ vihāraṃ idha māhu
Diṭṭhiñca anupagamma sīlavā dassanena sampanno
Kāmesu vineyya gedhaṃ na hi jātu gabbhaseyyaṃ punaretīti*

May all beings be happy.

Very good. Another very fruitful day without any doubt. Don't forget, from now to fall asleep is also part of our practice. Putting something beautiful into the heart, slip away into sweet oblivion. Awakening to take full advantage of the day. May you sleep peacefully.