Good evening. I trust you had a fruitful day. I do not say happy, but I hope it has been happy.

*Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammā-sambuddhassa. Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammā-sambuddhassa. Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammā-sambuddhassa.*

So we are continuing with this discourse, number 44, called the Shorter Series of Questions and Answers. We've been through the section concerning *sakkāya diṭṭhi* or the identity, personhood, personality, person view, eightfold path, concentration and the *saṅkhāra*, the volitional formations and all that. So now the next section we don't have to go through in detail. It's called the cessation of feeling and perception.

And it's a specific experience that comes after somebody has attained all the *jhānas*. So there are four, what we call *rūpa jhānas* or *jhānas* that depend upon some object such as *mettā* or the breath. And then there are the *arūpa jhānas*, which are not dependent on that, but have the same quality, the same mental quality of perfect equanimity that one comes to in the fourth *jhāna*, the fourth absorption. And there are four of those *arūpa jhānas*, the *jhānas* which don't have an actual specific object.

Now, if you happen to be a non-returner, which is the third level of attainment—the first is stream entrant, then there is the once-returner, he only has to come back once, and there is a non-returner. So that's somebody who has lost any delight in the sensual world but still delights in these *jhāna* worlds, these absorption worlds. And then finally of course full liberation with the *arahat*.

Now this particular experience, the cessation of feeling and perception, can only be had by the top two. You could have to be a non-returner or an *arahat* in order to experience this. So therefore, if you are at that level, then you can read the page. But what we're interested in is really that such a level exists.

Now, that point where perception and feeling come to an end is for some people an experience of *Nibbāna*, and for other writers, no, it's not. Now, the funny thing is that you can experience *Nibbāna* in the lower attainments. In fact the first attainment is an experience of *Nibbāna*, even if only as the Buddha says like a flash of lightning. But you see everything as it were—everything to be seen is seen but darkly—and therefore it would seem that it doesn't quite equate with *Nibbāna*, but some people say it does—the extinction of feeling and perception.

According to Dhammadinnā, you can't actually make a decision to do it. It occurs. It does not occur to him "I shall attain cessation of perception and feeling" or "I am attaining cessation of perception and feeling," nor afterwards "I have attained." It just comes when the time is right. And it's done, as I say, through this process of the *jhāna*.

Now, the interesting thing is, is that when a person comes out of that state, the three characteristics of existence are available to them. So the first one is the voidness contact. The voidness is the first thing they are aware of, which is, of course, the not-self. Remember that word *śūnya*, emptiness, which the Mahāyāna turned into a generalized concept of insubstantiality. Here, in the Theravāda tradition, it's more to do with the emptiness of self.

Then there's the signless contact, which is a funny way of saying that you see that everything is arising and passing away. Actually, what you see are consciousnesses arising and passing away. Remember, we can never experience the world out there as it is. When you're looking at a tree, you're not experiencing the tree as it is. You're experiencing the tree as your eyes will allow you to experience it.

And then there's *dukkha*, of course, the desireless contact, which is the end of suffering. So that's this whole section on the cessation of perception and feeling. And it's just good to know that there are such very high-level states.

The whole experience in *Nibbāna* is, shall we say, debated, which may come as a surprise to you. There are those schools that say it's like a blackout, almost like a very deep, deep, deep sleep. There's a disappearance, you might say. And this is definitely understood by those in the Mahāsi tradition, whereas those who come from the Ajahn Mun tradition, Ajahn Mahābua, Ajahn Chah, they would express it as pure awareness.

The same seeming contradiction exists in Mahāyāna, where the Mādhyamika people who follow Nāgārjuna would talk about it as a blackout, as a state of deep unknowing, and the Yogācāra people would see it as pure awareness. So people struggle with that. And one or two writers have tried to explain how that is. But basically there seems to be these two types of experience, which are both non-suffering. And that's the important thing is non-suffering. So we can leave that for another day, another time.

So we can go on now to feeling. Again, Visākha—who remember was the husband of Dhammadinnā—he asks, how many kinds of feeling are there? So I'll give you a moment there to answer that. How many kinds of feeling are there? It's another test.

So there are three, are there not? Painful, pleasant, and neither painful nor pleasant. Now, what is a pleasant feeling? What is a painful feeling? What is a neither painful nor pleasant feeling?

So whatever bodily or mental, whatever is felt bodily or mentally—so the body and the heart—the heart feeling as pleasant and soothing is pleasant feeling. And whatever is felt bodily or mentally as painful and hurting is painful feeling. And whatever felt bodily or mentally is neither soothing nor hurting, that is neither pleasant nor unpleasant feeling.

Now lady, what is pleasant and what is painful in regard to pleasant feeling? What is painful and what is pleasant in regard to painful feeling, and what is pleasant and what is painful in regard to neither painful nor pleasant feeling?

So we take it easy. So pleasant feeling is pleasant when it persists, painful when it changes. Now here, I think we have to understand this as our reaction to pleasant and unpleasant. As a pleasant feeling fades away, then a pleasant feeling is just fading away. But because we might be attached to that pleasant feeling, then there is a feeling of loss, and that's where the painfulness comes in. Or you could see it simply that as the pleasant feeling fades away, it's losing its pleasantness, and in that sense, it's becoming unpleasant.

And so it's the same with painful feelings. When it persists, it's painful, but as it changes, it becomes pleasant. So one can understand that if you've got a pain and the pain slowly is fading away, it is experienced as something pleasant.

Neither painful nor pleasant feeling is pleasant when there is knowledge of it. So when you're aware of neutral feelings, they're not painful, they're not unpleasant, they're just generally okay. And painful when you have no knowledge of it. So that's a bit of a conundrum. I've not been able to find why it's painful when you have no knowledge of it. What I suggest is that when the feeling arises with the perception, if there is a feeling and there's no perception, then there's an underlying ignorance to it. And that when it's recognized is painful. But frankly, I've emailed somebody to find out if they understand that last sentence.

So this is something that we can actually be aware of in our meditation. So there's a pleasant emotion. And as it passes away, it's losing its pleasantness. And in that sense, it's becoming unpleasant. When we have a painful feeling, such as a physical one, say pain in the knee, and it's slowly disappearing and we see it disappear, we can see that that loss of pain is experienced as something which is pleasant.

On top of that, of course, is our reaction, which we've, during this time anyway, put to one side. So your reaction to pleasantness, of course, is to grasp it, to want to develop it. And as it fades away, of course, then you start getting worried and anxious. And that's another type of suffering. And if it's painful and you have aversion to it, then the aversion itself is a state of suffering. So remember, there's pleasant feeling and unpleasant feeling, both physical and mental, which are quite natural. The Buddha has them too, but our reactions are unnecessary.

So the next section is to do with underlying tendencies. Now these underlying tendencies, they sit, shall we say, beneath our consciousness, beneath what's known as the mental continuum. And when something actually comes in which drops down, as it were, and excites the tendencies that are underneath that level of consciousness, then of course they pop up. So very simply, you walk into the kitchen and you can see the tea urn and immediately you think, I'll have a cup of tea. You might not have thought that before you enter the kitchen, but on seeing something, something will arise—an underlying tendency will manifest.

So what underlying tendencies underlie pleasant feeling? What underlying tendency underlies pleasant feeling and what for painful feeling and for neither pleasant or unpleasant? So I'll let you guess.

The underlying tendency to something that's pleasant is, of course, excitement. Because that's how we feel when something pleasant comes up, we want to grasp it. And that's your *taṇhā*, that's your wrong desire. Now, this word is often translated as lust. But lust, of course, is normally understood to be a sexual thing. But the word *rāga*, which it's trying to translate, is excitement, even uncontrolled passion for something.

Now, that word excitement rings true for me in a consumerist society because the whole point of consumerism is to make you constantly feel excited with the new—a new mobile phone, a new fashion. Everything's got to be new and that new has to come up just before the previous new is beginning to die out, because then, of course, boredom arises and you wouldn't buy it. So you've always got to have something new and that's to create that bubbly excitement.

The underlying tendency to painful feeling is of course aversion. You don't want it. So there again is your *taṇhā*—that's your wrong desire. And the underlying tendency underneath neither painful nor pleasant is of course ignorance. Ignorance again is a slightly wrong word because it's not that you're culpable, you're just not aware of it. So the underlying tendency is to be unaware of it.

So once we become more sensitive to the body, for instance, we become aware of small sensations that arise. You're more in contact, you're more embodied, you might say. It's the same with emotions. You might not have felt emotions actually in the body. Some people don't. But eventually through meditation, you actually start contacting emotions in the body. You can feel also fine mental states within the body. So that's an opening up to the finer feelings that we can experience.

Now the next question is: does the underlying tendency of excitement underlie all pleasant feeling? Does the underlying tendency of aversion underlie all painful feeling? And does the underlying tendency of ignorance underlie all neither painful nor pleasant feelings? And the answer, of course, is no. The underlying tendency isn't always there. So sometimes, especially if we're practicing well, a pleasant feeling will come up without that desire for excitement, for holding on to it. Sometimes when unpleasant mental states come up we can be quite equanimous with them. So it's not necessary for these things to come up. And of course ignorance doesn't have to be there—you can make yourself sensitive to your sensations, your feelings, your emotions and moods.

So then the next question is: what should be abandoned in regard to pleasant feelings, painful feelings, and neither pleasant nor unpleasant feelings? So of course what should be abandoned is that very excitement, that very aversion and that very ignorance. So that's pretty straightforward. We should abandon that. In fact that's the second Noble Truth, where the Buddha states that *taṇhā* is the cause—this wrong desire is a cause of all our suffering—and our purpose is to abandon it. So let go of it.

Then he asks, does this have to be abandoned to all pleasant feeling? And of course, it doesn't have to be abandoned to all pleasant feeling. What she says is that these underlying tendencies don't have to be abandoned by way of these *jhāna* states, these absorption states. So when you enter into absorption, into an absorption state, then of course these pleasant, unpleasant feelings, they all get pushed down, they all get suppressed.

And finally when somebody enters and abides in those places and touches upon *Nibbāna*, then there's a longing to continue that practice and work towards it. Now the interesting thing is that with that, he abandons ignorance and the underlying tendency to ignorance does not underlie that.

Now that's interesting in this sense that ignorance is one of the last fetters that hold you to this existence. And of course, you can't abandon ignorance itself. You can't abandon not knowing. What you can abandon is the product of not knowing, which is the sense of self, which is conceit. So with the ending of that sense of self and the conceit of self, the ignorance, of course, disappears. So that's a bit more subtle, you might say.

And the final part is counterpart. What is the counterpart of pleasant feeling? So painful feeling is the counterpart. What's the counterpart of painful feeling? Well, pleasant feeling is the counterpart. What is the counterpart of neither pleasant nor unpleasant feeling? In this sense, ignorance is the counterpart.

What is the counterpart of ignorance? True knowledge is the counterpart of ignorance. So in other words, seeing things as they really are is going to undermine ignorance. What is the counterpart of true knowledge? Deliverance is the counterpart of true knowledge. So in other words, you have to move towards deliverance, or should we say the true knowledge leads you to deliverance.

This word *paṭibhāga*, which is being translated here, both means opposition, but also means supplementary. So here we're coming the other way. Because of true knowledge, we're moving into deliverance. And the counterpart of deliverance, of course, is *Nibbāna*.

Then he asks, "Lady, what is the counterpart to *Nibbāna*?" "Friend Visākha, you have pushed this line of questioning too far. You were not able to grasp the limit to questions. For the holy life, friend Visākha, merges in *Nibbāna*, culminates in *Nibbāna*, ends in *Nibbāna*. If you wish, friend Visākha, go to the Blessed One and ask him about the meaning of this. As the Blessed One explains it to you, so you should remember it."

So questions can only take you so far. After that, you've got to start practicing. But remember that Visākha is already a non-returner and really he's coming along to see how his ex-wife understands the Dharma now that she's a full *arahat*.

Now, the next bit, of course, is interesting because this shows a relationship which would have been very strange, I think, for those times. "Then the lay follower Visākha, having delighted and rejoiced in the Bhikkhuni Dhammadinnā's words, rose from his seat, and after paying homage to her, keeping her on his right, he went to see the Blessed One." So that a man should behave like that towards a woman must have been, especially if there was an audience there, interesting.

And then he goes to the Blessed One and, of course, gives the whole entire conversation that he's had to the Buddha. And the Buddha replies, "The Bhikkhuni Dhammadinnā is wise, Visākha. Bhikkhuni Dhammadinnā has great wisdom. If you had asked me the meaning of this, I would have explained it to you in the same way that Bhikkhuni Dhammadinnā has explained it. Such is its meaning and so you should remember it." And that was what the Blessed One said.

And the lay follower, Visākha, who was a lay person at the third level of attainment, was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words. So there we have this wonderful discourse of questions and answers by the Bhikkhuni Dhammadinnā, who was a fully liberated being. So I hope you found that inspirational and that it will in fact fire you.

to continue your practice and attain full liberation from all suffering sooner rather than later.

So we can sit for a little while.