Good evening. I trust you've had a fruitful day. I do not say happy, but I hope it has been happy.

*Namo Tassa Bhagavato Arahato Sammāsambuddhassa. Namo Tassa Bhagavato Arahato Sammāsambuddhassa. Namo Tassa Bhagavato Arahato Sammāsambuddhassa.* Homage to the Buddha, the blessed, noble and fully self-awakened one.

I've been put onto a discourse by Nori and it involves a woman. Now you might think why haven't I included women? Well, it's not been my main focus whether it's a man or a woman but more the teachings. But unfortunately, women teachers in the discourses are few and far between. It's the age—we can put it down to the age. So let me tell you something about Dhammadinnā.

Dhammadinnā was an eminent *therī*, so she was an elder of the *bhikkhunīs*, the nuns, ranked foremost among nuns who possessed the gift of preaching. She was a wife of Visākha of Rājagaha, Rajgir. Remember, that's where King Bimbisāra lived. And when he, having heard the Buddha preach, became an *anāgāmī*—in other words, having heard the Buddha preach, he reached the third level of liberation—she left the world with the consent of a husband who sent her to a nunnery in a golden palanquin. There we are, now that's respect for you.

Dwelling in solitude, she attained arahantship. She later returned to Rājagaha to worship the Buddha, and there Visākha asked her questions on the *Dhamma*, which she answered as easily as one might cut the lotus stalk with a knife. These questions and answers are given, so that's what we're going to have a look at tonight.

Now here's a little bit of the mythical age. In the time of Padumuttara Buddha—so we're talking eons ago—she was a servant and one day saw the Buddha's disciple, Sujāta, begging alms and gave him curry. Her master, seeing this, made her his daughter-in-law. And later, while on a visit to the vihāra, she saw a nun declared to be a chief of preachers and wished for a similar eminence. And even before that, in the time of Phussa Buddha, she obtained merit by giving the Buddha's half-brother double the gift prescribed by her husband. And in the time of Kassapa Buddha, she was born as Sudāma, the sixth of seven daughters of Kikī, king of Benares. For 20,000 years, she lived in celibacy. There we are.

Now let's get to these questions. This discourse is called the Shorter Series of Questions and Answers, and it's a husband actually who's coming to ask questions. So she's been given the name of foremost in preaching or teaching by the Buddha, and this again is in Rajgir or Rājagaha, present-day Rajgir, which was the seat of Bimbisāra, king of Magadha.

So he approaches and says, "Lady, personality—what is personality called by the Blessed One?" Now, we've done this, so this is a little test. I'm going to repeat that again, and I'm going to give you a few seconds to decide what it is.

So personality—what is called personality by the Blessed One? "These five aggregates affected by clinging are called personality by the Blessed One. That is the body, feeling, perception, mental volitional formations, and consciousness, all of them affected by clinging."

Now, if you got that, you can give yourself a score of two. If you got close to it, one. If you didn't get it at all, zero. So now what he's saying here, of course, person, personality. Person, personality is, of course, identity. So it's the aggregates that are affected by clinging. Clinging is just a way of saying that association of me, of the self. This is me. I am my body. I am my feelings. I am what I think. I am what I do. And I am my consciousness of all this. So that's identity.

So then he goes on. He says that Visākha, a former husband, was delighted and rejoiced, and then he asked a further question: "Lady, what is the origin of personality according to the Buddha?"

Three seconds. What is the origin of personality according to the Buddha? "It is craving which brings renewal of becoming, is accompanied by delight and lust and delights in this and that. That is craving for sensual pleasures, craving for becoming and craving for non-becoming. This is called the origin of personality by the Buddha."

Now if you got that, give yourself two. If you got close to it, one. And if you didn't, zero. So here we have craving. So this is that *taṇhā*, that wrong desire based on a wrong understanding that true happiness can be found in the sensual world.

And we have the three cravings. The one is for just pleasure, just the ordinary pleasures of life, however you might describe that. But then there's this craving also to keep living, to keep becoming. And remember the craving not to become. So that is also part of our ability to zonk out when we're a bit depressed or we don't want to be around and we just do the duvet dive. At worst, of course, it's suicide.

So there we have it. Personality is caused by identity with the five aggregates, this psychophysical organism. And the cause of that is craving or this wrong desire.

And so now we have another question. Cessation of personality—cessation of personality. What is called cessation of personality or personhood by the Blessed One? You've got three seconds.

"It is the remainderless fading away and ceasing, the giving up, relinquishing, letting go and rejecting of that same craving. This is called the cessation of personality or personhood."

If you got that, give yourself two. And if you got close to it, one. If you didn't get it at all, zero. One more.

So what we're looking at of course is the Four Noble Truths. This is now—this is an easy one. This is an easy one.

"Lady, the way leading to the cessation of personality, the cessation of personhood"—so this is the Four Noble Truths based upon the idea of a self. What is that called? What is called the way leading to the cessation of personality? Now, I've given it away, so you must get that one right. I don't want anybody to go with complete zero. What is the way leading to the cessation of personality?

"It is just this Noble Eightfold Path: right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration."

So if you've got that, give yourself two. If you've sort of got it, one. But I don't think anybody's not got it. I'd be very surprised.

Now, here's the tricky one. This is when it gets a wee bit careful. Now it gets a bit tricky. So now is that clinging—so this is the self, the identity—the same as the five aggregates affected by clinging, or is the clinging something apart from the five aggregates affected by clinging? Is it the same or is it something separate? What do you think?

This is Dhammadinnā's answer: "That clinging is neither the same as the five aggregates affected by clinging, nor is clinging something apart from the five aggregates of clinging. It is the desire and lust in regard of the five aggregates affected by clinging that is the clinging here."

So see if we can deconstruct that. The clinging is neither the same—so in what way is it the same? It's the same because of that identity. When we talk about identity we mean a loss of objectivity. It's like this is what I am. At its most obvious way would be when we get completely lost in an emotion when we are the anger or we are the joy or the excitement. That's what we mean by identity. So in that sense it's the same.

But it is apart because it cannot arise without the five aggregates. In other words, there's no clinging, there's no self unless there are five aggregates. So therefore, and of course it is a consequence of this desire, this deluded desire to seek happiness in the sensual world. So it is, although it is the same, it is something else because it doesn't arise if there's no clinging. If there's no wrong understanding through desire, the self doesn't—this clinging self doesn't arise.

So that was a bit tricky, wasn't it? So I didn't put that to you as a—there's no marks for that one, unless you actually knew it. So you can add up your score. Now you should have six or four or at least two. So you can pat yourself on the back.

Now the next bit gets even more complicated and I'm just wondering whether we can go for it. Well, let's try. So now how does personality view come to be—personality view come to be? Now there's a difference between the sense of self and the view of self. The view of self is the wrong understanding. The sense of self is that feeling we have of being me.

"Here Visākha, an untaught ordinary person who has no regard for the noble ones and is unskilled and undisciplined in their *Dhamma*, who has no regard for true men, people, and is unskilled and undisciplined in their *Dhamma*, regards material form as self, or self as possessed of material form, material form as in self or self as in material form." It's a killer, isn't it? So is—they regard the body as the self or the self possessing the body or the body is in the self or the self is in the body.

There's a piece I've taken out from Ajahn Chah's book. I think it's in his How to Be with Death and Dying or something. This book about death and dying is excellent, by the way. And he points this out. The five aggregates of clinging represent different components of what one tends to cling to. So the physical body would be where I am. Feeling would be how I am. Perception would be what I am. The habits and everything is why I am. And consciousness, whereby I am. So that's just an aside.

So let's get back to this body business. So if we do it with a body, we can do it with the other four. And according to the note, these are the 20 kinds of personality view.

So the first one is the body and the self are one. So the commentary says, it's like the flame of a burning oil lamp is identical with its colour. So the body and the self are considered by the person as one of the same thing.

The self possesses the body. The next one was—the next one was the self as regards form as self, the self as possessed of. In other words, it possesses the body. So that's one of possession. Like when we say I have a bad knee. And this is as a tree possesses a shadow. So the self and the body are not one but the self does own it—has a relationship of ownership.

And then the next one was—material form as in the self. The material form is in the self. So the image it gives is as a scent is in the flower. As a scent is in the flower. So here the body and the self are the same but the self is greater. The body is in the self but the self is greater than the body. So there's still that identity but the person feels that the self is bigger than the body, is more than the body.

And the last one is that the self is part of the body. The self is in the material body or in matter. So the image there is of a jewel in a casket—of a jewel in a casket. So the self is simply a part of the body.

And if you think of the body, it does have its own autonomic ways of doing things, like the creation of blood and all that. So the self is, as it were, encased in the body. It's a different form of identity.

So the four identities are: I am the same as—a pure identity; one of possession; separate but the one is greater than the other—the body is greater than the self or the self is greater than the body. It's all very confusing, don't you think?

But this is the self as opposed to the body. You can do the same with feeling, you can do the same with perceptions, and you can do the same with the habits. And you can do the same with consciousness. And it all adds up to—what does he say?—20, 20 different kinds of selves.

So in what way does this help us? That's the question, isn't it? Well, it's a case of using it as a contemplation and in your sitting, just ask yourself: what's this sense of self I have? What's its relationship to the body? What's its relationship to feeling? You see, every time we're reacting, there's some sense of ownership, some sense of wanting it or not wanting it. So it's a case of using these reflections, these understandings to actually view our relationship to the body, to our feelings, to the way we think, to all our habits and to consciousness itself.

So I think it might be worth going over that sometime or other. So I can only hope these words have truly not been confusing and that it will assist you in your journey to final liberation, which will come hopefully sooner rather than later.

So we can begin our practices.