Very good. I trust you've had a fruitful day. I was going to say happy, but I hope it has been happy.

*Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammā sambuddhassa. Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammā sambuddhassa.*

So we had a break yesterday for the moon day. The next discourse I want to look at is a discourse that's written about this man called Upāli. And again, it touches upon *kamma*. So I thought it's a big, it's a long discourse, split it into two nights. So I thought it might be good to just revise quickly what we've done so far on *kamma*, then move on to this.

If you remember, the first thing that really connects us to what's happening now is the this-that law. Because that happened in the past, this happens now. Because that didn't happen, this doesn't happen now. Because this happens now, this happens now. Because this didn't happen now, this doesn't happen now. One was this linear causality which gives us a feeling of fate, and the other one was an immediacy, a contingency, which gives us a feeling when you put them both together, then you get this continuous creativity. So that was the first thing. Although that was connected to dependent origination, it still applies, of course, to all the events that happen in our lives.

And then we had that general statement that we are heirs to our *kammas*, owners of our *kamma*, born of our *kamma*, and so on and so forth. There was this understanding that *kamma* is something that we own, we're born of it from moment to moment, and that we have a control over it through this process of will. So if we don't will something - an idea or something that we say or something that we do - then of course that habit, which is the karmic response to karmic consequence of past actions, becomes... it dies out. And if we reinforce those actions or habits that we feel are wholesome and we reinforce it through the way we think, the way we speak and of course our actions, so that's the karmic thing.

And then there was this problem of what's your personal *kamma*. So that's really almost impossible to tell because there's so many factors that come into any present moment. Remember there was all the business of the earth, physics and chemistry, whatever happens - tsunamis, earthquakes and all that, and the good weather we've had and now it's horrible. All that is not our personal *kamma*. And it's the same with the seed, with the body we've received from our parents. That's not personal *kamma*. What we do with it is, but the actual physicality of our nature is something that's been given to us through past generations.

And then we had the mind. So the mind also has a way of working. Certain programs are set, like, for instance, the ability to learn language. We also mentioned this whole business of social conditioning, so that we are as children conditioned to think and feel like our society, like our nation, whatever it is. So we carry within us already all those vices and virtues that belong to our ethnic group, to our nation and so on and so forth. And the problem there is that when we see something is unwholesome, to be quick not to indulge it as a thought pattern, definitely not to speak it, and of course not to act upon it. So this was that whole business of social *kamma*. It's still very... what's individual is how it manifests through us and we're responsible for that.

And then there was *kamma*, of course, which is this ethical part of our nature, how we relate to the world, to other beings, to nature, to selves, and so on. So that relationship there, the Buddha says, is absolutely key to how we will enjoy life or not. And if you give credence, some credence to future lives, it has an effect on how we will be reborn, definitely throughout our lives. And not to confuse happiness, emotional happiness, which comes and goes, with some deep meaningfulness in our lives, which gives us a true inner joy. So that's why people will sacrifice their lives for their religion, for their political... lots of political prisoners, because that is what gives their life meaning. And that's what's crucial.

Frankl's logotherapy - I can't remember his first name, but he was the one who survived the concentration camps and through it developed a therapy called logotherapy, which was really because he had observed in the concentration camps that those who still had meaning for their lives, they were the ones who would generally survive, whereas those who'd lost meaning, who felt their lives had become meaningless or useless, would often succumb to the conditions.

So that's where we've got to now. So here we've got a slight nuance coming up on Upāli.

So on this occasion, the Nigaṇṭha Nāṭhiputa... now in the Buddhist text, he's called the Nigaṇṭha, part of a group, but by his own people, he's called the Mahāvīra, the great man. So he's the leader of the Jains. He's the one who founded the Jains. And he's the son of Nāṭhiputa. And he's staying in Nālandā, which became a huge university, with an assembly there.

And there was a particular Nigaṇṭha, one of the order members, called Dīgha Tapassī. Dīgha means tall, so he was known as Tall Tapassī. And he was wandering for alms around there when he came across the Blessed One who was sitting in Pāvārikā's mango grove. And so after they exchanged greetings, etc., he took a low seat and sat to the side. So in other words, he's honoring the Blessed One.

And the Blessed One asks him, "Tapassī, how many kinds of action does the Nāṭhiputa describe for the performance of evil action, for the perpetration of an evil action?" So in other words, what sort of action... would create an evil action. So he's thinking about mind, speech, or body.

So Nigaṇṭha, so Tapassī replies, "The Nigaṇṭha is not accustomed to use the word action, action." So this is the Buddha's word, *kamma*, an action, a doing. "The Nigaṇṭha Nāṭhiputa is accustomed to the description of rod, rod." Now, the word for rod is *daṇḍa*, which is a walking stick. But then, of course, it became a beating stick. So every time we do something evil, it was like we beat ourselves. And hence, the leader of the Jains would call them a rod.

"Then Tapassī, how many kinds of rod does the Nigaṇṭha describe for the performance of evil, for the perpetration of evil?" So, he says, "The Nigaṇṭha describes three kinds of rods and they are the bodily rod, the verbal rod and the mental rod."

So, we have to remember that Tapassī or the Nigaṇṭha taught that actions which were not intended but did harm still had karmic consequences. So, I remember for instance, walking in fairly dark while I was at Gaia House and inadvertently stood on a snail. And of course that crunching sound and then the squish. So of course I lifted my foot as soon as I could, but of course the poor snail had died or was dying. Now, of course, I didn't mean to do that. That was not a purposeful act. But that doesn't mean to say that the snail didn't suffer, you see. And so, in a sense, what the Nigaṇṭha is arguing is that, well, you still cause suffering either by carelessness or by accident. It doesn't matter. You've caused suffering and therefore there's some karmic result, you see.

But let's carry on. He says, "Well, how then, Tapassī," the Buddha asks, "is the bodily rod, the verbal rod, another, and the mental rod still another?" So this is the meaning that whether you mean it or not, you still have the consequence. "The bodily rod is one, friend Gotama, the verbal rod is another, and the mental rod is another."

"Of these three kinds of rod, Tapassī, thus analyzed and distinguished, which kind of rod does the Nigaṇṭha describe as the most reprehensible for the performance of evil action, for the perpetration of evil action, the bodily rod, the verbal rod, or the mental rod?"

"Of these three kinds of actions, friend Gotama, he describes the bodily rod, the actions by the body, as the most reprehensible for the performance of evil action, for the perpetration of evil action, and not so much the verbal or the mental rod."

So now we have this exchange, because remember, they don't have mobile phones to record anything in those days. "Do you say bodily rod, Tapassī?" "I say the bodily rod, friend Gotama." "You said the bodily rod, Tapassī." "I did say the bodily rod, friend Gotama." "So you actually did say the bodily rod, Tapassī." "I did say the bodily rod, friend Gotama." And thus the Blessed One made the Nigaṇṭha maintain his statement up to a third time. So that's to be absolutely sure that this is what you mean.

Now the Nigaṇṭha Tapassī asked the Blessed One, "And you, friend Gotama, how many kinds of rod do you describe for the performance of evil action?"

"Tapassī, the Tathāgata..." remember that's how he referred to himself, the transcendent one, the one who had arrived. "The Tathāgata is not accustomed to use the description rod, rod. The Tathāgata is accustomed to use the word action, action." So one was *daṇḍa*, which is the rod for beating, beat oneself with bad actions. And the Buddha uses the word *kamma*, which means action. So remember, literally, *kamma* is just the action. The consequence is *vipāka*. You come across those two words. These days, of course, we've accepted the word *karma* really to mean your comeuppance.

"Friend Gotama, how many kinds of action do you describe?" "There are three kinds of actions, the bodily, the verbal and the mental."

"Oh then, friend Gotama, is the bodily action, verbal action, and mental action still another?" In other words, are they separate actions like in the Jain system? "The bodily action is one, the verbal action is another, and the mental action is still another."

"But of these three kinds of actions, thus analyzed and distinguished, which kind of action do you describe as the most reprehensible for the performance of evil action, for the perpetration of evil action? Is it the bodily, the verbal, or the mental?"

"Of these three kinds of actions, Tapassī, thus analyzed and distinguished, I describe the mental action as the most reprehensible for the performance of evil."

"Did you say mental action, friend Gotama?" "I did say mental action." "Do you say the mental action, friend Gotama?" "I say the mental action." "So you say that the mental action is the cause of the performance of evil." "Friend Gotama, I did say it three times," you see. Thus did he make the Blessed One maintain his statement up to the third time, after which he rose from his seat and went to the Nigaṇṭha Nāṭhiputa. So he left after that. He didn't get into conversation any further.

Now, on that occasion, the Nigaṇṭha was seated together with a large assembly of lay people from Bālaka. And the prominent among them was Upāli. And the Nigaṇṭha Nāṭhiputa saw the Nigaṇṭha Dīgha Tapassī coming and said, "Now, where have you come from in the middle of the day?"

"I'm coming from the presence of the recluse Gotama."

"Did you have conversation with the recluse Gotama?"

"I did have some conversation."

"What was your conversation with him, Tapassī?"

Then Tapassī relates to Nigaṇṭha the entire conversation. And then Nigaṇṭha says, "Tapassī has answered the recluse Gotama like a well-taught disciple who understands his teacher's dispensation rightly. What does the trivial mental rod count for in comparison with the gross bodily rod?" In other words, from Nigaṇṭha's point of view, a mental thought doesn't have any big effect outside the mind. So how can you compare it to a physical action, which obviously has a greater effect? "On the contrary, the bodily rod is the most reprehensible for the performance of evil, for the perpetration of evil action."

Now, when this was said, the householder Upāli said to the Nigaṇṭha, "Good Venerable Sir, the Venerable Tapassī has answered the recluse Gotama like a well-taught disciple who understands the teaching of the Buddha, who understands the teaching of your dispensation. What does the trivial rod count for in comparison to the gross bodily rod? Now, Venerable Sir, I shall go and refute the recluse Gotama, Gotama's doctrine on the basis of this statement. If the recluse Gotama maintains before me what the venerable Tapassī made him maintain, then just as a strong man," now you've heard this before, "might seize a long-haired ram by the hair and drag him to and fro and drag him around about, so in debate I will drag the recluse Gotama to and fro and drag him all about."

So that's where I'm going to leave it for tonight because tomorrow night we have this wonderful conversation with Upāli and I shall leave you in suspense as to what happens by the end of it. So I can only hope these little readings are of some assistance and do not cause even greater confusion, and that they inspire you to continue your practice so you are fully liberated sooner rather than later.

So we can do a little bit of practice.