Good evening. I trust you've had a fruitful day. I do not say happy, though I hope it has been a happy day.

*Namo tassa bhagavato arahato samma sambuddhassa. Namo tassa bhagavato arahato samma sambuddhassa. Namo tassa bhagavato arahato samma sambuddhassa.* Homage to the Buddha, the blessed noble and fully self-awakened one.

Just as a reminder, if the broadcasting stops, if the YouTube stops, just give me a few minutes and I should be able to get it back up again.

So we are going through the story of Upāli. We had this Nigantha, a Jain monk, approach the Buddha and ask him what was more important: the mind, actions by the mind, or actions by speech or the body? According to the Jain understanding, the body is the worst thing and the mind is the least. But according to the Buddha, the mind is the forerunner.

I'd just like to quote the first verse of the *Dhammapada*, which I think most of you know is a collection of sayings: "The mind is the forerunner of all mental phenomena. Mind is the chief. They are all mind-made." And then, of course, he says, if you act with an impure mind, or one speaks or acts with an impure mind, pain follows or suffering follows as the wheel follows the hoof of the ox. And of course, there's the opposite of that if you have good thoughts, but everything begins in the mind. That's the Buddha's point.

So he goes back, he talks to the Nigantha. Nātaputta talks to the leader of the Jains. I'll call him Mahāvīra from now on, because that's what they call him, Mahāvīra, the great man. And he tells him what transpired. And there's a layman there, Upāli, who thinks that he will now go and convert the Buddha. And so he says things like—he's really showing off—he says, "I shall drag the recluse Gotama to and fro, drag him fro, drag him around and roundabout. And then I will shake him up and thump him about." So he's in for a big debate.

So he goes to see the Buddha. But before he goes, Dīghatapassī, who was the Jain monk who'd seen the Buddha previously, says, "Venerable Sir"—so he's talking to Mahāvīra—"I do not think the householder Upāli should try to refute the recluse Gotama's doctrine, for the recluse Gotama is a magician and knows a converting magic by which he converts disciples of other sectarians."

Now, Mahāvīra won't take that. He says, no, no way, you'll never convert Upāli. Upāli is a devoted disciple of mine. And of course, the usual thing: you ask him three times, three times the Mahāvīra says to Upāli, "No, go and try and convert the Buddha."

So off he goes and he meets the Buddha at Pāvārika's mango grove. This is up near Nalanda, remember, which became a huge university. And the Buddha—he asked the Buddha had he met Dīghatapassī and the Buddha then tells him what conversation they had.

And so now we go back to this original statement: "What does the trivial mental rod count for in comparison with the gross bodily rod?" So this was the stick that you beat yourself with when you do something harmful. "On the contrary," he says, "the bodily is the most reprehensible for the performance of evil action." So the Buddha wouldn't deny that physical actions are probably worse. Well, I think he would say they're worse in effect. But it all starts with the mind, remember.

So now the Buddha says, "Well, let's debate this on the basis of truth." So he says here, "Sāmaṇera, so one of your people might be afflicted, suffering and gravely ill with an illness, needing treatment by cold water, which his vows prohibit, because cold water could have living beings in it." Remember the Jains are probably the greatest example of ahiṃsā. "And they might refuse cold water, though mentally longing for it, and use only permissible hot water, thus keeping his vows bodily and verbally." So the vow is kept physical and verbal. "But because he does not get cold water, he might die. Now, householder, where would the Nigantha Nātaputta describe his rebirth?"

And Upāli says, "Well, he will be born among the gods called the mind-bound gods." Now, why is that? Because he died—he was still bound by the mind. In other words, it was his mental acts that drove him to this particular rebirth.

So the Buddha says, "Oh, pay attention how you reply. What you said before does not agree with what you said afterwards, nor does what you said afterwards agree with what you said before." That's the first example.

So in the next one, he says, "The Nigantha has four restraints, is clamped by four restraints." These are the four restraints: the Nigantha is restrained with regard to all water; he's endowed with the avoidance of all evil; he is cleansed by the avoidance of all evil; and he is suffused with the avoidance of all evil. So that is the leader, the guru, you see. "And yet, when going forward and returning, he brings about the destruction of many living beings. What result does the Nigantha Nātaputta describe?"

Well, he says, "Well, Mahāvīra does not describe what is not willed as greatly reprehensible." So that's interesting. The Buddha says anything that is not willed—in other words, that's by accident or by ignorance, not knowing—for instance, I once was walking in the dark outside and there was this awful crunch under my foot as this poor snail succumbed to my weight and got squashed. And I didn't feel very well about it, but according to the Buddha, I'm not guilty of doing harm as such because there was no intention. But in Jainism, even when you don't have intention, you've still done harm, so therefore there are consequences.

But he says that it's not greatly reprehensible. But if one wills it, that is greatly reprehensible. "But under which of the three rods does Mahāvīra describe willing?" "Under the mental rod, venerable sir." So what he said is that the actions that you do are first of all willed. So now he says, "Well, even though the action might be terrible, it all began with the will."

So now Buddha says, "Pay attention how you reply. What you said before does not agree with what you said afterwards." That's your second one.

Now, the third one is a bit of magic. "Suppose a man came brandishing a sword and said, 'In one moment, I will make all the living beings in this town of Nalanda one mass of flesh, one heap of flesh.' Would this be possible? So what do you think, householder? Would he be able to do it?" So he says, "No, the householder Upāli says, "Even if a hundred, even if a thousand of these people with a sword, they wouldn't be able to kill everybody in that town."

Now, the Buddha says, "Suppose a brahmin or a recluse possessed of supernormal power and attained mastery of mind would be able to reduce ten, twenty, thirty, forty, even fifty Nalandas to ashes with one mental act of hate. So what does a trivial act, a trivial Nalanda count for?" So in other words, the Buddha says, "Supposing somebody came with that sort of supernatural power, would he be able to do it?" So Upāli's just agreed, you see. So again, the Buddha says, "Now pay attention. What you said before, that mental acts weren't important, does not agree with what you've just said."

So he's got three of those now. And then there's something which is from the *Jātaka* tales. Now the *Jātaka* tales were a collection of stories about the Buddha's previous births. And a lot of them—some of them are actually taken from Aesop's fables, you know, the Greek author. And they're all made up between about 300 BCE, they think, to 400 CE. So there was a whole stretch of time when stories about, supposedly, supposed stories about the Buddha in his past life, were made up.

So now he says, "In those stories, the Daṇḍaka, Kaliṅga, Mejjha and Mātaṅga forests became forests. How did they do that? How did they become forest?" So he replies, "I heard that they became forest by means of a mental act of hatred on the part of the *ṛṣis*, the seers, the holy men."

"Oh, pay attention Upāli. What you said before does not agree with what you said. What you say now does not agree with what you said before." So again, the Buddha is proving to Upāli that the mind is first.

Now, evidently Upāli seems to have been converted by the very first example. And he immediately says that he goes to the Buddha for refuge: "I go to the Blessed One for refuge, to the *Dhamma*, to the *Saṅgha* of *bhikkhus*." So he's been converted, you see.

And the Buddha replies, "Investigate thoroughly, householder. It is good for such well-known people like you to investigate thoroughly." Now, this really pleases Upāli. He's quite taken by it because he says, "You know, if I had been converted to another sect, they would have carried me around. They would have carried a banner all over Nalanda telling people that Upāli had been converted. But on the contrary, the Blessed One says, 'Be sure of what you're taking on here, investigate properly.'"

And then the Buddha says to him, "Your family has long supported the Niganṭhas. You should consider that alms should be given to them when they come." So this, of course, is quite astonishing because lay people only give to those gurus whom they are disciples of.

Now there was an occasion when there was lots of food left over from a *dāna*, from a meal that the Buddha and his disciples had in one of these big parks, one of these big shrines—they were shrines mainly. And Ānanda goes to the Buddha and says, "We've got all this food left over." And the Buddha said, "Oh, we'll give it to these other members of these other sects," you see. And so they did. And then the stories came back through Ānanda to the Buddha who said the lay people were very upset. "They want to give food to you. They don't want to give any food to these other rascals." And so the Buddha established a rule. Whatever food he receives as a *dāna*, he can't give to members of other sects. Not even a biscuit.

So now Upāli is very pleased with that. And then the Buddha gives him a teaching: "And right there, when he knew that the householder Upāli's mind was ready, receptive, free from hindrances, elated and confident, he expounded to him the teaching special to the Buddhas: suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering and the path"—the Four Noble Truths.

"And just as a clean cloth with all marks removed would take dye evenly, so too, while the householder Upāli sat there, the spotless, immaculate vision of the *Dhamma* arose in him: 'All that is subject to arising is subject to cessation.'" And so he became a *Sotāpanna*, a stream-entrant right there.

So then he left. He's got things to do. "Now is the time, householder, to do what you think fit." So off he goes, goes back home. And when he goes back home, the word gets out that he has, in fact, been converted.

So when Dīghatapassī, that's the original Jain monk, tells Mahāvīra, of course, he can't believe it. So he goes to find out. And then when he finds out, he comes back and he tells Mahāvīra, "Venerable Sir, it is only too true that the householder Upāli has gone over to the discipleship of the recluse Gotama. Venerable Sir, I did not get your consent when I told you. Venerable Sir, I do not think the householder Upāli should try to refute the recluse Gotama's doctrine, for the recluse Gotama is a magician and knows the converting magic by which he converts disciples of other sectarians."

So as it happens, the Nigantha—now Mahāvīra now goes to visit Upāli and he goes with a large retinue, a large number of his followers. And Upāli has told the doorman that if anybody comes who is not a disciple of the Buddha, that they should wait until he comes out and greets them, you see. So his guru, his former guru, the Jain leader, has been asked to wait.

And when Upāli hears he's there, he says, "Go and make the seats ready in the hall of the central door." Now, when Upāli comes in, he sat down on the highest, the best, the chief and most excellent seat there. And then he told the good doorkeeper, "Go to Mahāvīra and tell him, please enter."

And when he enters, of course, previously, this big high seat would have been given to Mahāvīra. But it's not. And the Mahāvīra says, "Householder, are you mad? Are you an imbecile? You went saying, 'Venerable sir, I shall refute the recluse Gotama's doctrine,' and you've come back all caught up in his vast net. Just as a man who went to castrate someone and came back castrated on both sides, just as a man went to put out somebody's eyes and came back with both his own eyes pulled out, so you too, householder, went saying, 'I shall refute Gotama's doctrine,' and you've come back all caught up in a vast net of doctrine."

"Auspicious is that converting magic, venerable sir. Good is that converting magic." And then Upāli says, "I wish all my people were converted."

So then there's a lot of stuff here which we can miss out, the usual stuff. But then towards the end of this rather long conversation with Mahāvīra, Upāli suddenly comes out with ten verses, each one of which ends with, "The Blessed One is he and I am his disciple."

So the last one of these ten is: "He has severed craving"—this is the Buddha—"and become the enlightened one, cleared of all clouds and completely untainted, most worthy of gifts, most mighty of spirits, most perfect of persons beyond estimation, the greatest in grandeur, attained the peak of glory. The Blessed One is he, and I am his disciple."

So the Jain leader Mahāvīra says, "When did you concoct this hymn of praise to the recluse Gotama, householder?"

"Venerable sir, suppose there were a heap of many kinds of flowers, and then a clever garland maker and garland maker's apprentice were to knock them up into a multicoloured garland. So too, Venerable Sir, the Blessed One has many praiseworthy qualities, many hundred praiseworthy qualities. Who, Venerable Sir, would not praise one who is praiseworthy?"

Then the Nigantha Nātaputta, Mahāvīra, was so unable to bear this honour done to the Blessed One, hot blood then and there gushed from his mouth.

Now the commentaries go on to say a heavy sorrow arose in him because of the loss of his lay supporter, and this produced a bodily disorder that resulted in his vomiting hot blood. After vomiting hot blood, few beings can continue to live. Thus they brought him to Pāvā on a litter, and shortly thereafter he passed away.

Now that is two-thousand-year-old fake news. Right there in the Buddhist scriptures: fake news, or if you wish, alternative facts. The Nigantha, the Mahāvīra as he is known, died of starvation, which is the way that Jains would prefer to die. I stand to be corrected, but as I understand it, the body is a manifestation of your bad *kamma*, and the more you can leave the body, the more the soul will rise up into heaven, and therefore just letting go of the body, just allowing it to die and stop eating—and elderly people will do that and they will see it as a way to liberation.

And when I looked up starvation, of course, virtually all the animal kingdom stop, die when they can no longer feed themselves. So it's the natural way. And it would seem it's not all that—there's not much pain to it. The body simply draws itself down and then stops.

So I can only hope that this wonderful story of Upāli has been entertaining, but also has been some teaching there about the Buddha's insistence that the mind comes first. Everything starts with the mind. And when you will something, it will manifest. Either there's a train of thoughts, some fantasy or whatever, or through our speech or through our bodies. And therefore we have to be very careful what comes up in the mind.

I can only hope that by your diligence in observing the mind, your practice will lead you to full liberation sooner rather than later. So we can continue with our practice.