Good evening. I trust you've had a fruitful day. I do not say happy, though I hope it has been a very happy day.

*Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa. Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa.* Homage to the Buddha, the Blessed, Noble and Fully Self-Awakened One.

We're going to move on. This is called "The Wilderness of the Heart."

So here's the Buddha now. He's back up in Sāvatthī, which is the capital of Kosala. That's the northern part above the Ganges, obviously below the Himalayas. And he's at Anāthapiṇḍika's park. Remember, I think it was a merchant who went out of his way to pay a lot of money for this ground that he covered with gold. That's what he said. He used to be a prince of Jeta's.

"Bhikkhus, that any bhikkhu who has not abandoned the five wildernesses of the heart and not severed the five shackles of the heart should come to growth, increase and fulfilment in this *dhamma* and discipline—this is impossible."

So we have five wildernesses and five shackles to get rid of. And when we talk about the *dhamma*, of course it's not one of morality. Monks also are not supposed to kill other beings and so forth. The difference is that monks have institutional rules and regulations. So these have not got to be confused. It's not some huge moral dilemma whether to eat before noon or not. It's just a rule that is kept by the monastic order. And the reason is that any group of people who live together, whether they like it or not, create rules and regulations. Mostly they're hidden, they're covert rules. So you don't go playing music at two o'clock in the morning if you're living with your family or with friends. There are all these little rules that nobody ever makes explicit, but they're there. And remember that these rules that the monastics have came about because of naughty monks and nuns.

So what are these five wildernesses? Here there is doubt, uncertainty, indecisiveness and lack of confidence in the teacher—heaven forbid! And thus the mind is not inclined to ardour, devotion, perseverance and striving.

So you have to have confidence in the teacher. And the distinction between that and having a blind faith is really important. As I'm sure many of you know, we've had some really bad cases within Buddhism in the West of what can we say—definite heavy misbehaviour by teachers. It's always men, it's always to do with sex. So one has to be careful that one doesn't sell your soul to the teacher. One always keeps a certain distance, a certain quality of gentle inquiry, a certain critical ability. Or else you just become a slave.

And the point in Buddhism, of course, in the Buddhist teaching, is that what the teacher is supposed to be doing is guiding you along the path. So as you yourself are practising, you'll know whether these instructions are any good or whether the teachings you're being given are helping you. So that's it. It's important that we have confidence in the teacher.

I remember when I first worked with Buddhist teachers, but when I met Sayadaw U Janaka, who was the Mahāsī teacher, a direct disciple of the Mahāsī, there was just this feeling in me: this is the man, this is the one. And luckily it turned out to be true. The other thing we do with teachers, of course, is overestimate where they are. That's always a bit of a problem. You always think the teacher's more attained than they actually are. And I've definitely made that mistake. So never guess where your teachers are. It's not important. It's not important because in a tradition, what they're doing is passing on the tradition. And it's not important where they are in the scale of things, although it's always a benefit if they've experienced what they're teaching.

Then there is a lack of confidence—the same thing, but a lack of confidence in the *dhamma*. So this again comes back to your actual experience. If your meditation is actually helping you in your life, then obviously it's working. So any doubt should be undermined by that. And reading, when you come across passages which you don't understand or things that you doubt, like rebirth, the existence of gods and heavenly realms and all that—in Buddhism, it's not a belief system. One always puts that on the back burner. There's no proof for it and there's no proof against it. It's just the way it is. It's the same with *Nibbāna*. If you're a committed scientific materialist, then *Nibbāna* is something that you experience in this life in momentary forms or not at all. So that's undermined by recognising that we don't have to believe anything.

Then again, there's confidence in the training. The *dhamma*, I suppose, was meant for the actual teaching, the intellectual business. And this is about the training itself. So here we come across this terrible thing about lack of success. As meditators, we're always looking for some progress—where's the progress? So remember, when we first start, there's an immediate effect. We're lifted by the practice. And because we're taught to look at things differently, there's a whole sequence of insights that we make when we first begin. But then, of course, you hit the plateau and that's when the work starts.

So remember that progress is a bit of a—you have to be careful with the idea of progress. I always think it's better to think in terms of the heart, in terms of whether we're becoming kinder, more gentle, more compassionate, et cetera. And that for me is an easier telltale. And of course you can't look over a week. You can't say how much have I progressed this week, because sometimes you dip and then you've got to climb out of the hole. So it's basically looking over the past years—even two or three years—and then you realise, yeah, I have progressed.

Then there's anger and displeasure with companions in the holy life. It can be jealousy—somebody's sat there for three hours and not moved and you're fidgeting about wanting to get off after half an hour, and all this jealousy comes up and envy. So one has to accept that as unnecessary. And obviously in a meditation retreat sometimes we get angry with people who sneeze and whatnot. And sometimes it's very peculiar, but you can suddenly find all this aversion coming up towards somebody even though you might have met them at the beginning of the retreat. You know nothing about them, but there's something about them that reminds you of something that you're very angry about.

So the one great thing about spiritual companions is that you don't have to like them. They're there as support. And that's quite a liberation when you realise that. You don't have to like your spiritual companions. I don't have to like the monks I live with. As long as they're keeping the rule and they're practising, they are a support to me. And that's great.

So these are the five wildernesses of the heart. So we'll come back to them right at the end.

Now then there are these five shackles. Here a bhikkhu is not free—it keeps translating this word *rāga* as lust, but it's actually a passion, an overindulgence, a "I've got to have" feeling. Because lust obviously has a meaning of sexuality about it, but it's anything that you're obsessive about. Free from that obsessive need, free from desire, affection, thirst, fever, and craving for sensual pleasures. So that's the first shackle—always wanting to find something pleasurable for the senses: to look at, to see, to hear, to taste, et cetera.

Then there's the same thing—he says craving for the body. And this is referring to our own body. And I can only presume this is being over-solicitous with our bodies, caring too much for our bodies, being worried about our bodies, always wanting to make it look beautiful—stuff like that—not accepting it as it is.

And then it says the same thing: this obsessive desire and the desire and the affection and the thirst of people for form. And this refers to other people's bodies. So that obviously can be a bit lustful. But it's that it becomes a shackle—something that ties you down.

And then, of course, there's eating as much as he likes until his belly is full and he dodges in the pleasures of sleeping, lolling and drowsing. So these are—especially in this lockdown, this was really one of the dangers. I think I mentioned in that very first opening talk that you have to give yourself something to do. You have to have some challenge, or else you start eating too much and start just hanging about. And it's a funny thing, but the more you hang about, the more you hang about, because the body gets slothful and you've got to get up and give it exercise.

So that's a big shackle. Ties you down.

And then there are other practitioners who aspire to some order of gods. In other words, they want everything they're doing is to be reborn in a happier realm. And that's obviously—I mean, it's not an evil thing to desire, but obviously it's well short of our real goal, which is *Nibbāna*.

So these are the five shackles of the heart that have to be abandoned. And of course, he says that any practitioner who has not abandoned these five wildernesses in the heart and severed these five shackles in the heart should come to growth, increase and fulfilment in the *dhamma*—that is impossible.

So there's our task.

Then of course the whole thing is repeated for people who have abandoned these things, so we don't have to read through that. Then towards the end, he also says that he must develop the basis of spiritual power—*iddhi-pāda*—a real building up of energy. Just like these people who pump iron—they want to get stronger and stronger and stronger and they're committed to winning the exhibitions and all that. So it's that commitment. And these are—the best translation is "path to success." Sometimes it's put as "the path to power," but it's the path really to success. If you want to succeed in anything, these four qualities are needed.

So the first one is a real desire, a real longing for *Nibbāna* or for anything in your life. You've got to really want it.

And then he develops the basis for spiritual success consisting in concentration due to energy. So wanting something is not enough. You've got to put your energy into it—your energy and determined striving.

And then he develops a spiritual power consisting of concentration due to the purity of the mind and determined striving. So purity of the mind is—this is for really anything really—to have good intentions. We have good intentions—of course that's very empowering. So it's a case of giving ourselves really wholesome intentions for doing something, and in this case to become liberated from suffering. That's a good intention.

And then the final one is: develops the spiritual power consisting in concentration, investigation and determined striving. So this investigation is really keeping that ability to be constructively critical about things—to keep awake, not to just do something. For instance, you might set off doing a task and then realise that if you keep doing this, you're going to exhaust yourself or it's not really working. But you ignore that. You keep striving. And in the end, you end up with a failure. So it's always this business of taking stock as to where we are at any one time.

And it's definitely true in the spiritual life. We'll sail along, doing a bit of meditation, doing a bit of that. And then we'll realise that, no, you've got to put a bit more energy to it. Then sometimes you really go for a bit more energy and you realise you're putting too much energy. And in fact, you're just over-efforting. And that produces also a sense of not getting anywhere. So that ability to have that critical faculty constantly with us.

The fifth one he adds on to these four—this isn't part of the *iddhi-pāda*—is a sense of enthusiasm. Now it's translated "enthusiasm" but the word itself is a sort of exertion, and it's often coupled with another word, *ussāha*, which means strength or power. So it really means he's really stressing this real complete full-throttle energy to achieve the goals.

Now as soon as you say that, people think, "Oh, I'm going to be a stream-enterer. I've got to get through the four attainments." But that would be the wrong thing. Those are our aim, the objective. The aim is to get there fully liberated to *Nibbāna*. But the objective—the present moment-to-moment objective—is of course to establish that affectionate awareness at all times. It doesn't have to always be affectionate. It can be just a cool investigative awareness, but it's got to be there. And that's the effort.

So at the end of the day, when you look back and you think, "Have I been mindful all day?" Don't get upset. There's no point in getting upset about it. It's just a reflection that, yeah, I should have put more energy there. I should have woken up. I should have held myself, et cetera.

For instance, I had to go to the shops and I went at the wrong time. There was quite a long queue and I was standing in the queue there and I could feel this irritation coming: "Why don't we get on with it?" And unfortunately, there was a woman came out. She looked at me and I think that sense of irritation was on my face, unfortunately, and I could see her turning away. That's the way it is.

So now we've got these fifteen factors.

So then he gives the usual little metaphor. "Suppose there were a hen with eight, ten or twelve eggs, which she had covered, incubated and nurtured properly. Even though she did not wish, 'Oh, that my chicks might pierce through the shells with the points of their claws and beaks and hatch out safely,' yet the chicks are capable of piercing their shells with the points of their claws and beaks and hatch out safely. So too, a meditator who possesses the fifteen factors including this real exertion, is capable of breaking out, capable of enlightenment, capable of attaining the supreme security from bondage."

So there's the present—there's the gift at the end of all this striving.

So if we go through that rather quickly: doubt in the teacher, in the *dhamma* and in the community, the *saṅgha*; doubt in the training; and being angry or jealous with our companions. And then to get over this craving for sensual pleasure, craving around our bodies—being over-solicitous around our bodies—craving for other people's bodies, overeating and sleeping (that's all one), and making an aspiration for a better life after death isn't quite what we should be doing. If that happens, all well and good.

And then we have to get—so that's the five wildernesses, the five shackles, and then finally we have to develop this sense of zeal, of real desire, longing, with the energy, the purity of heart, the critical faculty, and this all-powerful struggle, exertion to attain the goal. And of course that—and always remind ourselves, we're not trying to attain any spiritual attainment. We're trying to establish a moment-to-moment mindfulness. This is the secret of success. That's the Mahāsī.

So at the end, of course, unlike the discourse we heard yesterday, "the bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words." So I think he must have been happy about that.

So I can only hope that this helps you to become enthusiastic about your practice, that you will struggle. The struggle continues. *La lotta continua.*

*dukkha* until that final day when you are completely liberated from all suffering. May it come sooner rather than later.

So we can do some sitting.