Oh, thank you very much, and these are a few of them.

We were talking earlier about things that we're thankful to you for. We're thankful for your sense of humour. We thank you for teaching us a solution for relationships in pain. And when I hear the word refuge, I think of Satipañña. It's my spiritual home. Thank you very much.

I had a struggle with, I had to make sense of Jesus, there's no doubt about that, because he was just so deeply buried in my heart. And I struggled with that for a very long time. And I had to come to some sort of understanding. I used to go, while I was in Sri Lanka, to see a friend who was a Hindu, but he had been a Catholic. It was funny, he kept talking about imagery, he kept talking about metaphor. I just wasn't getting it because in Theravāda, everything is so scientific. There's not much theatre, there's not much poetry in Theravāda as such.

And it just came upon me all of a sudden, while I'm struggling with the essential mystery of the body and the wine. What's he trying to get across with that? And this is of course my own interpretation, that when he talks about "this is my body and this is my blood," most people think he's talking about Jesus, he's talking about the body. In fact, even in the scriptures there, he says that to some people and they're disgusted with him. It's like cannibalism.

But if you think about the Christ within, if you think about the Buddha, then ask yourself, what is the base of our Buddha nature? What's its platform? It's awareness, isn't it? *Sati*. What vivifies it? It's that intuitive grasp of things. So it's two sides of the same coin, the bread and wine, the awareness, and this intuitive grasp of things. That's what I think, and that's what I understood his teachings to be about. When I told this to the last Archbishop of Canterbury, he said, "Very interesting." Rowan Williams, yeah, "very interesting," he said.

So once that was sorted, it made sense to me what he was trying to do. Because I think, frankly, he was trying to lift the Jews out of monotheism into something beyond that. In the same way that Hinduism moves from Vishnu, Brahma, and Shiva, trying to lift them out to Brahman. So it's moving into that non-personal, non-dualistic level. And now you'll find teachers in Christianity that are teaching exactly that. Cynthia Bourgeault, Professor Cynthia Bourgeault, you get her tapes and they're teaching Jesus, they're calling him the wisdom Jesus and they're teaching him as a non-dualist teacher.

Now, what happened, of course, was that Paul began to teach it to the empire. Where were the empire? They were in polytheism. A polytheistic religion isn't about morality, it's about power. You need the gods to do what they're supposed to do, so you offer them sacrifices and all that. The shift towards monotheism was a complete shift. And it all happened 2,500 years ago, with the Buddha, with what was happening in the Upanishads, with Lao Tzu, with Socrates, and with Moses. That was a huge shift in human consciousness.

But the Buddha went just one step beyond. Because there's no God, there's no personal God in Buddhism. So he's already there at the pinnacle of non-dualism. And Śaṅkarācārya, I read a book called *The Critical History of Indian Philosophy*. And according to this philosopher, Śaṅkarācārya, the great teacher of Hinduism, actually took everything from Buddhism and made it into Hinduism and turned it into a non-dualistic religion. That's how I struggle with it.

Bhante, you're the same age as Donald Trump.

What, you want me to commit suicide?

Bhante, if Samuel Beckett had ever written a Buddhist play, it would be the story of your life.

Thank you for a wonderful Dharma talk.

For me, despite all the wonderful teachings, the Great Day Retreats, the Ship Street Gardens, the Dharma School, the thing that always comes to mind for me is trying to find new and unusual places to have a siesta after lunch. More recently it's been in a papier-mâché castle in the nursery room at the Dharma school surrounded by cuddly toys.

I wouldn't do it again. I mean, it's been worthwhile. It's been worth the life, but I don't want to do it again under any circumstance. What I'm hoping is that I come back, if I have to come back, with a bit more wisdom and I don't fall into these great big catastrophes. We talk about the Buddha's great enunciation, the great deliberation, the great determination. Well, the only thing I ever did was the great black hole. I was trying to get out of it. But it was a miracle to me, coming across the teaching. It just lifted me out so quickly and grounded me.

All I knew was that after I finished the book, and I've been trying to find it, but it's not there. I'm going back to Burma, and I'll probably visit that monastery and see if I can find it. But it's a strange thing, isn't it, that books find you. People find you. It's weird. It's surprising how all you've got to do is ask, isn't it? Ask and the door should be open.

When you go to Japan, you said about Dōgen was one of your draws. Could you say any more about that?

Well, it's only because of that connection with Throssel. I've always wanted to visit the original monastery, because that's where Roshi Kennet, if you want to read a biography of somebody living in a Zen monastery, training in a Zen monastery, read the biography of Roshi Kennet. She was there for about three or four years, I think. It's a story of a half, because she's the only woman, and she's coming across all these very male males. So I wanted to visit that just as a thanksgiving, to go to a place that had such an effect on me. I'm taking Carl. April 2nd for about three weeks.

I had two hypochondriacal fears. The first was going mad. From about the age of 13, 14, I always felt I was going to go mad. And that left me with that out-of-body experience. The other one was paralysis. I went through this peculiar moment when, as I joined the order, my body was flinging itself all over the place. I once woke up in the middle of the night with my body just...

Bhante, just to wish you a happy birthday, and I was thinking that what you said just now, that you were in your not wanting to teach phase when you came here almost 30 years ago to teach that retreat in Tullā, and for me it was a huge turning point. So it was one of my blessings, so thank you.

Hi, this is Jimmy here. I was also at that retreat, and I can remember quite well. I just want to say that even though I had never been to Satipañña, I still hold you as my teacher. I want to say as well, seriously, that the talk that you've given is such a real talk about a real person and not somebody stuck in high pollution philosophy or something. It makes such a difference that you can mix both of them so well, and it's a joy to have you as a teacher. I want to put emphasis on the word joy, grateful in the midst of all the confusion and despair.

I think I paralleled you a little bit in going to Throssel Hall as my first point of call for a Buddhist teaching. I think I was possibly a few years behind you. But I was struggling with their approach, which I found rather rigid and overly dogmatic and controlling. So it was a great relief for me when I did a retreat with you and Ruwan Adama in 87 in Birmingham. It was quite a turning point for me, and it was a big turning point for our group when you came to Dublin the following year and moved in the more Theravāda way than the Zen way.

Hearing the story about you robbing cigarettes was so relieving. On the first weekend, we didn't know we couldn't eat, so we robbed bananas in the kitchen. I never told you that.

What are your hopes for the next 10 years?

That I continue to live. I think I need a bit more time. What I would like is a halo of teachers. Do you like that? A halo of teachers to be established here. Seven or eight of them. So that the place just has that background of good teachers. At the moment we have three. So there's Carl, Ayya and Huss. So it'd be nice to have that. And hopefully to find a way to run this place which doesn't depend on me. That's my target for the next five years. And then I'll disappear. I'll only disappear when it's time to go.

You talked before about Gaia House and the dilemma of becoming a layperson and disrobing. You've chosen to be on your own. I just wonder about your commitment to being in robes and sticking with the monastic order despite not being with other people.

Lone monks are known. It's not a choice, it's just the way I've ended up. There are no Western monks that I was involved with in Sri Lanka who could have come over with me. There just weren't any. So I was basically on my own from the beginning. It would have been nice to have had a partner or somebody to run the place, somebody whom you're compatible with. You have to remember that just because you're a monk doesn't mean you like the person. It's a varied community.

There have been many times throughout the 30 years, this is my 30th year, where I've wanted to leave. There was one point where I was going to bed saying, "Right, tomorrow that's it, we'll get out, we'll do something useful." And I'd wake up in the morning and I'd say, "Well, God, I'll give you just one more day." In the end I just had to laugh.

Every time I came to this point of wanting to leave, I couldn't think of anything at all in society that attracted me. I went through the whole job spectrum. And I usually ended up with a fantasy of stacking shelves and going back to the garret and doing my meditation. So I said, "Well, I can do that without stacking shelves."

Why not just become a layperson?

Well, I'm stuck with the colour. I mean, I'd love to wear blue. Pink. I'd love to wear pink.

We wanted to show you the birthday cake that we'll be celebrating your birthday with. So we're celebrating with cards that we sent based on some of the memories that we have from visiting. I just wanted to share one little story that we still find amusing. It was the time that we climbed up a mountain. For those of you who don't know where it is, it's a mountain of spiritual significance here in West Kerry named after St. Brendan the Navigator, who went to the shores to America. So a few years ago, we hiked up with Bhante right to the top where there's a beautiful Catholic cross and an inscription and a little cairn of stones.

So Bhante decided that at the top of the mountain on a clear blue sky day, very calm, that he would chant. So he sat in the little cairn and he began his chant, his Pali chant, which we joined in, and then suddenly this wind whipped up, started blowing around us at the top of the mountain, and Bhante put up his hands and he said, "The wrath of St. Brendan is upon you!" So that's one of the memories we have from one of your visits here to us, Bhante. Thank you.

John here just to wish you a happy birthday. Thank you. That's your first ten-day retreat you performed in the pub view hostel twenty years ago, so you've gone from strength to strength and we thank you for your inspiration.

Thank you very much. Keep the cake. I'm coming. If we could keep you in peace, we would, but we'll send you photos of it. We're just going to light the candles now and sing you out from West Kerry. Thank you very much.

You know, come on, we're going to sing it in Irish, Bhante, happy birthday to you in Irish. You've had it in Pali and you're getting the Gaelic version now. Thank you very much. I'll eat the head.

What's your funniest teaching experience? Funniest teaching experience? Can't think of any. What do you mean by funniest teaching experience? Actually, you've got a question to answer as well. You answer her question. That was about the robes. See, I remembered. The robes. Why don't I? Oh, I see.

Well, the robes are a guardian, really. Because you have to behave in a certain way when you walk around in robes. But it's just, you just get used to it. I haven't even thought about that, really. The question was about, you know, other than that, have you thought about being a Dharma teacher, but as a layperson?

Oh, yeah. That's what I thought, yeah, but it doesn't attract me because Dharma teachers, they get support, but remember they've got massive overheads. Sometimes they have children, they have cars to run, all that sort of stuff. Being a monk really releases me from all that sort of baggage. You shouldn't call it baggage really, you should call it delight. Releases me from the delight of all my life. So that my, you know, once I've got my laptop and stuff like that, that's it. If I left, it would, I don't know, it just doesn't attract me. I mean, I'm conditioned now. It takes such a long time to recondition yourself. I just feel comfortable in the robes. It's as simple as that. And I haven't got long to go anyway.

That's the point that you... Ah! Hello. Ah, hello Mike. Our building consultant. Upon whom we are dependent. Hi. Hi Bhante. Hi. Well, happy birthday. Thank you. I'm getting distracted here. I've got two things going on at once. There seems to be a delay on the... Can you hear me? Yes, yes.

Ah, well, happy birthday. Thank you. And thank you so much for all the teachings you gave me over the years that we've been building together. There was one incident that actually typifies you, which you probably actually forgot, but we were away in Suffolk and we went to a church. And whilst we were wandering around, the verger came out and gave us a guided tour. And there was a chap came into the church who was distressed, didn't have any money to get home, was obviously in an incredibly bad way. Before the verger could actually say anything, you'd put your hand in your pocket and gave the guy five quid. And the verger was so blown away, he couldn't believe your generosity and your instant kindness. And that's a memory that sticks with me when I think of most of the stuff.

Thank you very much, mate. It was a very generous moment, and it just typified your embodying loving-kindness. Really a nice moment. Yeah, that was a good moment I had. Well, we all love them sometimes. Exactly that. Take care. Well, I hope there's another seventy years worth of influence, if not presence, in the Satipanya. Certainly the building will last another seventy years. Yes. I'll see you Thursday. Yes. It's coming up to check it out.

A funny teaching moment, I can't think. Pam? This is sort of related to that. I've known you for a really long time. Forty years, probably. Yes. And you always were really, really, really funny and I think you're still really funny. And so do lots of people who really appreciate your sense of humour. How important do you think a sense of humour is in the spiritual life? Not just yours, but everybody's spiritual life. Do you think that a sense of humour has a place?

Well, definitely it's catching the irony, isn't it? It's catching the paradox, seeing the paradox. Remember in Zen Buddhism, once you break through the delusion, there's this great guffaw, this great laugh that it's all been this stupid mistake. Now you've messed up. Oh, hello. Ricardo, come in. Is that over now, is it? Ah, that's it. Fantastic. Thank you very much.

So, yes, how are we doing for time? Tea time, is it? No, there's stuff to do, yeah. Oh. So, yes, humour. I'd like to take this opportunity to present you with a cheque, quite a large cheque. This is donations, as you know, from all of the Sangha. A very generous offer has been made to round up what was donated to give us this figure of seven thousand and seventy pounds and seventy pence. My goodness, look at that. Seventy, seventy, seventy. That's not bad, is it? Seventy, seventy, seventy.

Yeah, I'm particularly relieved because it means I can get a return ticket. That's wonderful. Thank you. Bodhidhamma. No. No, it's not. Bodhidhamma. No, it's not. No, no, I'm joking. Oh, you're joking. Kill that man.

Nor is that me also to remind us that we've got other groups sitting around the world. We don't know exactly how many people have been tuning into the broadcast, but we will find out. But there's Ursula in Liverpool, the group there. That's right. Sandra and Gianni are in Italy who are on retreat at the moment, but they send us good wishes in spirit. And Michelle in Switzerland and the group there. And Marina at Terre de Ville in France. Ah, Marina. There we are. Thank you. Over to you.

Oh, look at that. Thank you, he's high. So we wanted to present you this little Parinirvana Buddha as a symbol of the big Parinirvana Buddha that unfortunately couldn't get here in time for your birthday. And Richard's son Simon bought it in Sri Lanka. Did he? Oh, right. He's happy, isn't he? He posted it. He's very happy, look. He chose one. You get a crick in the neck if you stay like that. Thank you very much. I'll put that here.

And we also wanted to give you this little book for you to read on your pilgrimage. It's the seventeenth century haiku poet's account of his own pilgrimage in Japan. Apparently he also wanted to go all his life on a pilgrimage and managed to get round to it later in life. That's lovely, thank you.

Sadhu! Sadhu! Sadhu! Sadhu!

That sounds a bit like me. So, Bhante, I was glad to see you got at least one birthday card through the post, because otherwise you might have been a little bit disappointed that we'd forgotten you. But what happened was we asked everyone to send their birthday cards to Daya and Richard, who then bound them up into that lovely book. Yeah, that's right.

So what we asked people to do was to maybe find a photo or a quotation or something that represented however you would judge their lives over these past years, and I think you will find that there are really very beautiful expressions of gratitude and appreciation there and friendship and also some attempts to illustrate the Dhamma which might give you a little bit of a fright. Who knows? Who knows what? But so your great gift to us has been to really bring the Dhamma alive in your teachings and your interactions so that we thought for your birthday you might like to just receive a magazine and let what you have given out to us over the years be reflected back. And also, anyway, we really enjoyed approaching the Dhamma this way, you know, trying to find pictures that would illustrate things like *dukkha* and *anattā* and so on. So if you can enjoy reading through it as much as we enjoyed putting it together, we will be very happy.

If you thought that looked like quite a few cards, we've got a few more here for you. This is another book that we put together in a portrait format. Oh, that's lovely. And in this box here are some more cards and a scroll from Sister Ruth. Oh, Sister Ruth. And I think you'll find that that's obviously from the group who made the cake. It looks like Simpsons. Thank you so much. It's a lovely box too. It does, doesn't it? That's disgusting. Thank you so much.

Oh, heavens, more. Happy birthday, Bhante. Thank you, Pam. Very important person in my life when we were young and carefree, yes, in those happy days in Birmingham. And I wasn't going to say anything so it's written so I think I'll just read what I... so these two pictures you'll see what they are, you know what they are because you said they were okay.

So the story is that we were travelling around Malaysia and went to a Buddhist centre, I think it was in Malacca, and explained Satipanya. And the very nice woman there, the nun, said, "You must have these two pictures on very thin rice paper." Now, we were going around Malaysia with small backpacks, two weeks. New Zealand, five weeks. Cambodia, Bangkok. So these pictures have been around the world, eventually got them back home to Stroud, brought them to you to see if you'd like them for your birthday and you said yes, so they went back to Stroud to be framed and now they're here. So with lots of love from me, Paul and Jack and Rosie.

Fantastic, thank you. Can I open it? Yeah, you certainly can. There we are, right, okay, well let's see what we can do here. It must be. You can't just rip it off, can you? Not that they've spent so much time putting it together. I think I can slip it out, actually, from there. To... Hey, aren't they beautiful? I can't believe that we travelled around with them. We travel light, small day packs for twelve weeks. And we actually managed to get them here without any tears. Beautiful. Thank you so much. Pleasure. Oh, my goodness.

*Sukham āyudhīghate!*

Fantastic! Fantastic, thank you so much.

That's it now. I've just got to say something. Divert the attention away from you, Bhante, for just one minute. And just say something on behalf of the Satipanya trustees, which is to mark and thank everybody for the fantastic effort that's gone into this day and how it's worked so well. Firstly I'd like to thank Charles and Heather, Pete and Mark are here today, thank you very much, it's been fantastic. Also understand that Paul could have been here but he isn't, he's unwell and just to send our best wishes to him and thanks to him as well. And then to thank the Satipanya Sangha which has been fantastic today, couldn't work without you and thank you very much.

And then to say that behind every great effort and event there's always a committee and we had the Birthday Celebration Committee, I think they call it. Satipanya Celebration Committee. And I'd particularly just like to thank Aya, thank Noreen, Sarah, Daya, and Richard, and Mark the voice. And thank you very much for all your help and well done. And for anybody out there in the world who hasn't made a donation yet, the lines are still open until midnight tonight. They're on PayPal.

So can we say that people who stay behind can have a piece of my cake? Yes. Yes. Yeah? I'm not supposed to eat it by myself, am I? It's fantastic. Oh, my goodness. Gwen made the cake. That's what you call a fruitcake. That is a fruitcake. Very good.

Matthew, do you want to tell people at all whether or not they're going to come back after two years? Would you say goodbye now? I didn't feel people had any further questions or anything. I saw them on your eightieth birthday party. Can I just interject something? There is a small extra gift from the local Satipanya group in 1980. And then come back? No, and leave it outside. So if we go for tea, it could be there. You might be able to see it. Oh, very good. Very good, let's go for tea.

You always wanted a dog, didn't you? Oh, I do not want a dog.