*Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammasambuddhassa.* Homage to the Buddha, the blessed noble and fully self-awakened one.

So I thought this evening we'd tackle this rather long discourse. It's called the Discourse on Voidness. This is just another way of saying not-self, *suñña* in Pali. In the Mahāyāna it's *śūnyatā*. Remember that they extended the idea of not-self, non-substantiality to everything. That's why they prefer the word *suñña*, emptiness, to the word *anattā*, not-self. Anyway, this is about *suñña*. These concepts, everything that the Mahāyāna talks about, you'll find the seed of many of their concepts right here in the Theravāda. That's what my teacher told me, and I agree with him.

So the Buddha is up in his own country now. He's back at Kapilavatthu, which is where the big mound is. His burial mound is up there. There were eight of them, as far as I remember, but the one that everybody visits is at Kapilavatthu, or Kapilavastu, as it's called now, I think. So he's at Kalakanjakarama, the Sakyan's dwelling. He goes there and makes his way to that place, and there's lots of monks there. From there he goes to see Venerable Ānanda, who's at Ghata, and that's another dwelling of a man called Ghata.

He asks him, "Venerable sir, many resting places have been prepared and many bhikkhus are living there making robes." This is during the robe-making season, so that would be during the *vassa* season. Now, Ānanda, what the Buddha thinks is that lots of people, lots of visitors, is not good for the spiritual life. A bhikkhu does not shine by delighting in company, by taking delight in company, by devoting himself to delight in company, by delighting in society, by rejoicing in society. It is not possible that he will attain at will, without trouble and difficulty, the bliss of renunciation, the bliss of seclusion, the bliss of peace and the bliss of enlightenment. It can be expected that someone who lives alone, withdrawn from society, will have little trouble or difficulty.

So then the Buddha says much the same thing. Somebody who withdraws from society either abides in the deliverance of the mind that is temporary and delectable – those are the *jhānas*, those are these higher absorptions – or the perpetual and unshakable deliverance, which is the full liberation. So it can be expected that when somebody lives alone, withdrawn from society, that he will achieve this.

Now, you have to take this into context. So as lay people, the less that you are engaged in useless talk, useless TV viewing, useless talk on WhatsApp and all that, and withdraw into your own silence, and find a secluded place, and make any communication or entertainment meaningful, then you are following the Buddha's advice here.

So he goes on to say, "I do not see any kind of form" – whenever you see the word form in the translation here, it basically means whatever you're looking at – "from change and alteration of which there would not arise sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief and despair in one who lusts after it and takes delight in it." So again, we're back to this distinction between enjoying something and becoming attached to it, becoming dependent on it for a particular mental state or finding something pleasurable in order to run away from what is unpleasurable. So when you feel a bit bored, then you might turn the TV on. That would be the wrong intention.

Now, when he's a Tathāgata, he doesn't want to be criticised because he himself is often surrounded by a retinue of his order, plus kings or king's ministers, other sectarians and their disciples. They might come and he's surrounded by all these people. So other people will say, "Well, what about you?" He says, well, when he's talking to them, he invariably talks to them in a way concerned with dismissing them. That's a rather harsh way of putting it. In other words, keeping to the point of the discussion or whatever they want to know so that they leave. So there's no talking for talking's sake.

Then, abandoned like that, it's much easier to get concentration. And if you are pretty good at getting the *jhānas*, then you'll know that it does help to keep the mind, generally speaking, throughout the day calm.

So now he gives attention to voidness internally. So again, this voidness is emptiness, this non-substantiality in everything that we experience internally. These are the five aggregates: the body itself and all its sensations and feelings, pleasant and unpleasant feelings, the perceptions, concepts, all that mental stuff, all the dreams, fantasies, the thinking, and consciousness. When he turns with that view of seeking, of seeing the emptiness of things, the lack of solidity, the insubstantiality, this is also a path to liberation. In the same way he would do it within the *jhāna* states if you are an adept, and also you do it to other people too. You see it in other people. You're aware that just as this is true for you, so it is for every other living being.

And then, if you are an adept at *jhāna*, when you come out you do have good strong concentration and you can turn that towards seeing the three characteristics. This brings about a certain confidence and a steadiness and an ability to stay on the path as you want it.

And then finally, we take it into action. "While I'm walking thus, no evil unwholesome states of covetousness and grief will beset me." Covetousness and grief is just another way of saying greed and hatred or aversion. And in this way, he has full awareness of that. And so he does with the standing, the walking, the sitting. No unwholesome states will beset me because of this inner imperturbability – that's how it's translated – in other words, the ability to keep the mind pure and clean.

Such a person will avoid low talk, vulgar, coarse, ignoble and unbeneficial, which does not lead to disenchantment, dispassion, cessation, peace, direct knowledge, enlightenment and Nibbāna. So now we've been through this list before. It's the talk of kings, so government, robbers, ministers, armies, dangers, battles, food, drink, clothing, beds, garlands, perfumes, relatives, vehicles, villages, towns, cities, countries, women – this is for men; if you're a woman, it's men – heroes, streets, wells, the dead, trivialities, the origin of the world, the origin of the sea, whether things are so or not so.

Now, all these subjects we do talk about, and there's a way of talking about them where they are not ignoble, vulgar, coarse and unbeneficial. It's up to us to decide when we're talking about these things in a beneficial way.

Then he goes on to the five aggregates, the five chords of sensual desire. That's your five senses, the outer senses, hearing and so forth. "Should constantly review his mind: does any mental excitement concerning these five chords of sensual pleasure ever arise in me on any occasion?" So we have to be that alert, that moment-to-moment awareness to catch that relationship we have with the pleasures that the five senses give us. And when he can say to himself that no mental excitement concerning the five chords of sensual pleasure arising me on that occasion, such a person has arrived at the non-returner. That's what the commentaries say. In other words, at the third stage of sanctity, of nobility, as they would put it: desire and lust for the five sense pleasures are abandoned in me.

So all the earlier practice was generating insight into the way things are, the three characteristics of existence, how we create suffering, *dukkha*, desire, impermanence and not-self. And here it's beginning to culminate in a letting go, a disenchantment with the world of desire. Remember, whenever we talk about this, don't forget that the Buddha, after his liberation, continued to eat, enjoy the forests and so forth.

And now there's the five aggregates affected by clinging. So now we go back to the five aggregates. Here's the Buddha describing a way to become liberated. We go back to the five aggregates, but this time to investigate their not-self, their emptiness. "Such is material form, such is arising and such is disappearance. Such is feeling, such is arising and disappearance. Perception, its arising and disappearance. Formation, mental formation, dreams, fantasies, such their arising, their disappearance. And consciousness, such its arising and disappearance." And while he abides contemplating the rise and fall of these five aggregates affected by clinging, the conceit "I am," based on these five aggregates affected by clinging is abandoned in him. And that's when a person becomes fully liberated.

So just very quickly, the Buddha has delineated a path of liberation by seeing the voidness of things, the emptiness of things, the lack of substantiality of things. But also one can see this as the awareness is empty of all those things. So there's a dual meaning there.

So now the conversation changes and the question is: what good does a disciple see that he should seek the teacher's company if he is told to go away? In other words, why do you want to stay around a teacher? And then he says, "Well, Ānanda" – he's talking again to Ānanda – "a disciple should not seek a teacher's company for the sake of discourses and standards and expositions." And then he praises Ānanda: "You've remembered all these teachings, you can recite them verbally, you've examined them with your mind." But such talk deals with... instead of that, we should be talking about effacement, as favours the mind's release which leads to complete disenchantment.

So what should be talked about is wanting little, contentment, seclusion, aloofness from society, arousing energy, virtue, concentration, wisdom and deliverance. That's what we should be talking about when we are with our teachers.

Then he talks about how a teacher or a disciple falls off the path. So a teacher, for instance, maybe living secluded in a ravine, a hillside or whatever, but the brahmins and householders from the town and country visit him, and as a result he goes astray, becomes filled with desire, succumbs to craving and reverts to luxury. This teacher is said to be undone by a teacher's undoing. So there's always that danger of being lured back to the sensual life.

And then the similar thing happens to a pupil. So they go find a place which is secluded. But because of all these visitors, they get drawn into the sensual life, the householder life. So remember, you have to translate this as a layperson. Obviously, you can't go to a forest on the foot of a tree. But it's to do with attitude. It's to do with not being drawn into the delicious delights of the sensual world, but just enjoying it. So there's always that real difficulty for us to distinguish between enjoying something and becoming dependent on it for happiness. And the word here that he uses is excitement. Whenever you feel that over-excitement, you know something's wrong.

Now, when the Tathāgata, the Buddha, appears in the world, although he may live secluded and he may be visited by all these people, he does not go astray. He does not fall and revert back to luxury. And if a pupil does that under the teachings of a Buddha, then this is bad news. Because with other teachers, lesser teachers, there is a loss. The pupil loses out on where that teacher could take them. If you happen to be the pupil of a Buddha, he can take you all the way. And to fall by the way under a Buddha's dispensation while the Buddha's there is certainly bad news.

So then he says the final sentence: "I shall not treat you as a potter treats the raw, damp clay. Repeatedly restraining you, I shall speak to you, Ānanda. Repeatedly admonishing you" – admonishing here means advising – "I shall speak to you, Ānanda. The sound core will stand the test."

Now, were it not for the commentary, I don't think anybody can understand that. So the commentary says: "The contrast in this simile is between the way the potter treats raw, damp clay and the way he treats the baked pots produced from the clay." The commentary says, "After advising once, I shall not be silenced." So this is the Buddha talking. "I shall advise and instruct by repeatedly admonishing you. Just as a potter tests the baked pots, puts aside those that are cracked, split or faulty and keeps only those that pass the test, so I shall advise and instruct by repeatedly testing you. Those among you who are sound, having reached the paths and fruit, will stand the test." And the commentary adds that mundane virtuous qualities are also intended in the criterion of soundness.

So the Buddha here is saying that his job as a teacher is to keep guiding the student not only towards full liberation, but also towards the purity of the heart. And I'm reminded of Ajahn Chah, who said his job was to watch his pupils walking. And when they went off a bit to the left, he'd say a bit more to the right. And when they went off to the right, he'd say a bit more to the left. So our teachers are there to guide us and keep us on that straight and narrow.

So that's quite a long discourse on voidness. Remember that voidness, *suñña*, is just another way of saying *anattā*, not-self. I can only hope these words have been of some assistance, that they've not been too confusing. And that by your endeavour to purify the heart and maintain this right mindfulness you will be liberated from all suffering sooner rather than later.