Thank you. Good evening, everyone. I trust you've had a fruitful day. I do not say happy, but I hope it has been happy.

*Namo tassa bhagavato arahato samma sambuddhassa. Namo tassa bhagavato arahato samma sambuddhassa. Namo tassa bhagavato arahato samma sambuddhassa.* Homage to the Buddha, the blessed, noble and fully self-awakened one.

So we're moving on now. We're going back to this character of Vachagotta. We met him before, earlier on, mainly to do with the thing about the fire. Anyway, you can revise that if you want. This last discourse really tells us how he got on.

He goes to see the Buddha. He's at the bamboo grove at the squirrel sanctuary in Rajagaha. Rajagaha, which is now present-day Rajgir, which was the seat of Bimbisara, the king of Magadha on the Ganges there. So he comes to the Buddha and he says, can you teach me in brief what is wholesome and what is unwholesome?

So the Buddha replies that he can do both in brief and, of course, in detail. And then he says listen closely. So he basically goes through what we already know, the ten unwholesome actions. So greed is unwholesome. Now this word greed, I've always thought it's better to think of it as acquisitiveness.

So these are your three basic roots. So mistaking our identity for this human form, we obviously want to try and make ourselves happy. That's when the acquisitiveness begins – the money, the people, the fame, the power, the holidays, and so on and so forth. And then there's the aversion, which remember includes both a dislike of, a hatred of, and also a fear of, and of course delusion. And out of these three basic dispositions of acquisitiveness, aversion, and delusion, we have wrongdoing.

So the first three are to do with the body. So that's killing living beings – you can extend that to harming them for no good reason. Taking what is not freely given and misconduct of sensual pleasure. So normally that's translated as sexual, but it has a much wider meaning of indulgence. So that's the body.

Then there's speech, which is of course false speech, malicious speech, abusive speech, and just gossip, just talking for talking's sake. So that's to do with speech.

And then finally to do with the mind: covetousness, wanting what other people have, ill will, and of course wrong view, wrong understanding, which takes us back to these three misunderstandings about impermanence, cause of suffering – this desire – and of course not-self.

So then the Buddha says that when somebody abandons all that, it's like the palm stump. So once you cut the frothy bit at the top of a palm, it just doesn't grow again. That's it. All the taints are destroyed. So if you remember the taints, the oozings, the cankers: sense desire, the desire to keep becoming, wrong view. Sometimes ignorance is put with wrong view, but that seems to me just to double it, say the same thing really. So normally it's sense desire, becoming – wanting to continue to become, to create this constant self, this selfing – and this basic ignorance.

So now Vachagotta goes to ask him a question, and it seems to be that he's wondering if the Buddha is the only one who's actually enlightened. So he's got all these monks, all these nuns, all these lay people, but is he the only one that's actually fully liberated?

So he asks, is there amongst your monks anyone who's entered and abide upon the deliverance of mind and the deliverance by wisdom? The deliverance by mind are the absorptions and the deliverance by wisdom is through the *vipassana* or through the investigation of the three characteristics. That's the one that liberates you.

And the Buddha replies, "One hundred or two hundred, three hundred, far more monks who, by realizing for themselves with direct knowledge here and now, enter upon and abide in the deliverance of mind and the deliverance by wisdom that are taintless with the destruction of the taints."

So first of all, Vachagotta wants to know, are there any monks who have been fully liberated? And the Buddha says, loads of them. And then he asks, what about the nuns? And the Buddha says, loads of them.

And then he asks, is there one lay person clothed in white leading a life of celibacy who with the destruction of the five lower fetters will reappear spontaneously in the pure abodes and there attain final *Nibbāna* without ever returning from that world?

So here we're talking about the non-returner. So he's not asking if there are any fully liberated lay people. He's asking if there are any that have attained the third attainment. So remember there's the stream-entrant, the one who has that initial experience of *nirvana*. Then there's the once-returner who has a deeper experience, which as it were undermines this greed and acquisitiveness and aversion. But the non-returner is the one who's left the sensual life as a place to seek happiness.

So he asks, is there any layman who's done that? And of course, the Buddha says, you know, just so many, one hundred, three hundred, four hundred. And later on, he asks, is that the same of the women lay followers? And of course, he says, yes, there are hundreds of them.

And then he asks, is there any lay follower, any manly follower, clothed in white, enjoying sensual pleasure, who carries out his instruction, responds to his advice, has gone beyond, become free of perplexity, gained intrepidity, and become independent of others in the teacher's dispensation?

So this is somebody who is a stream-entrant, got the first and the second. These people who've attained those two levels obviously still are committed to sensual pleasure as a place to find true happiness, so they're not fully liberated. And he says, well, there's hundreds of them too, and the same for the women.

And what Vachagotta then says: "If only Master Gautama were accomplished in this Dharma, but no monks, and later on no nuns, no laymen, and no laywomen, then this holy life would be deficient in that respect. But because Master Gautama and the monks are accomplished in this Dharma, the holy life is thus complete in that respect."

So what Vachagotta is saying is that having all these people around him, both monks and lay people, who've attained like this, really substantiates the Buddha's teachings.

And this, of course, then he says – the image, he always gives a little image: "Just as a river Ganges inclines towards the sea, slopes towards the sea, flows towards the sea, and extends all the way to the sea, so too Master Gautama's assembly, with its homeless ones and its householders, inclines towards *Nibbāna*, slopes towards *Nibbāna*, flows towards *Nibbāna*, and extends all the way to *Nibbāna*."

So having said that, now Vachagotta, although he's been coming to the Buddha for some time, has enough confidence to declare that he actually wants to take the robes. "I go to Master Gautama for refuge, to the Dharma and the Sangha. I would receive the going forth under Master Gautama. I would receive the full admission." So he wants to become a monk.

And then what the Buddha says is, well, anybody who's coming from another teacher, they have to go into a probation period of four months. But I recognize the individual differences in this matter. So what he's saying is for you, Vachagotta, you can come straight in.

But Vachagotta is humble enough to say, no, no, I will live on probation for four months. And at the end of four months – excuse me, he's on probation for four years, not months. Sorry, the probation is normally four months, but what Vachagotta says is, I'll remain in probation for four years. And at the end of four years, if the monks are satisfied with me, let them give me the going forth and full admission to the monk's state.

And so, now not long after that, he goes to see the Buddha to teach the Dharma further. So he's been a monk, he's been in the order, as it were, as a *samanera* for about four years. And the Buddha now gives him further developments to lead to the penetration of many elements. And what he does is he gives him those types of instructions that lead to the fourth *jhāna* and above.

Now, at the point of fourth *jhāna*, and this is what the Buddha sees in Vachagotta, he's able to attain the powers, the higher powers.

And I'm now moving on to number 77. We've also been here before with Sakuludayin. And we're going to have a quick run through these *abhiññā*, the higher powers.

So the first one is the mind-made body. These are normally very strange things to us with our very concrete scientific minds. So here somebody can create another one of themselves, their body and mind. And it gives many examples, but one is: this is the sword, this is the scabbard. The sword is one, the scabbard is another. It is from the scabbard that the sword has been pulled out. And just as a man were to pull the snake out of its skin and think thus: this is the snake, this is the skin, and so on and so forth.

"My disciples, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to create from this body another body, having a body, mind-made with all its limbs, lacking no faculty." Now, in other words, that would be appearing in two different places as two different bodies.

Now, you might say to yourself, well, of course, that's ridiculous. But I would encourage you to read a book about this wonderful Indian woman who was a teacher in the seventies, eighties. I think she died late last century. And her name was Dipa Ma, D-I-P-A M-A. And a book has been written about her by one of her students, Amy Schmidt. She was also a teacher of the people, like Sharon Salzberg and Joseph Goldstein and people like that. And she was a Mahāsi devotee. So if you read that book, you'll see actually that she had that power, now, with witnesses. So it's up to you. What I say is keep these things on a back burner. You never know.

Now, the second one is what we would know as astral travelling. And I know somebody who's done this, so for me it's not absolutely impossible. But basically it's the mental body which leaves the physical body, and that's happened to one or two of my students. And that, of course, is a finer material than all this physical matter, and therefore it can travel wherever it wants. It can go unhindered through enclosures, through mountains, dive in and out of the earth and so on and so forth. So that's the second *abhiññā*, that's the second power.

The next one is the divine ear, whereby you can hear things which is not possible through the ordinary physical ear.

The next one is to understand people's minds. Now, some of you who've been long-distance and been with me through these talks might remember the story of the Jungian therapist of the Isle of Man who went to Burma, ended up visiting this old man in a monastery, old monk in a monastery to be taught Buddhism. And they had a long conversation, two hours or so. And during that whole time, he never used the interpreter. And of course he didn't speak a word of Burmese. So even that is possible too.

Then there's the recollection of past lives. Now in the *Visuddhimagga*, that's the Path of Purification by Buddhaghosa – it's a big tome, I've mentioned it before – instructions are given on how to do this. So what you do is you begin now and you go backwards onto your life, trying to remember as much as you can. And then you come forward, trying to remember as much as you can. And as all the memories come back to you, come back to you, come back to you, right to your birth. And you break through that barrier into the previous life. So there's actually a methodology that you can do if you want to find out what your past lives were.

The next one is the divine eye. Now, the thing about the divine eye in terms of the Buddha was that that's what he saw upon enlightenment, upon his awakening. He saw all his past lives. But with his divine eye, he was able to see that beings were moving from one realm to another dependent on their moral decisions, upon their ethics. So this was a direct understanding by him of the importance of morality.

The final one, of course, the greatest of them all, is the destruction of the taints. That's the biggest of all powers, the destruction of the taints. And that, of course, is a sign that somebody is liberated from all suffering.

Now the one thing you'll notice that's not included in this list is healing, which is interesting, isn't it? Don't ask me why.

There's also another book that you might be interested in called *The End of Materialism* by Tart, T-A-R-T. And in it, there are all these experiments. The one I remember is being down in a submarine way down there where there is no electromagnetic signal whatsoever and the ability to have that extrasensory perception about what was going on, reading, telling people what was going on in the world elsewhere. So that's the two books there: *Dipa Ma* by Amy Schmidt and *End of Materialism* if you're interested.

Now actually, if you were to give me a choice, if you were to say would you have any of these powers or would you prefer to compose a Beethoven symphony or a Shakespearean play or a Dante-esque poem, I think I'd go for those rather than all these wonderful powers, but then that's just me.

So now we go back to Vachagotta and find out what happened to him. So of course he does develop all these powers. "Dwelling before long, dwelling alone, withdrawn, diligent, ardent and resolute, the venerable Vachagotta by realizing for himself with direct knowledge here and now entered upon and abided in that supreme goal of the holy life for the sake of which clansmen rightly go forth from home life into homelessness. He directly knew: Birth is destroyed. The holy life has been lived. What had to be done has been done. There is no more coming into any state of becoming. And the venerable Vachagotta became one of the Arahants."

Isn't that a lovely ending?

Now, then he sees these venerable ones on their way somewhere. And he asks them where they're going. He says, we're going to see the Blessed One. And he tells them, say to the Blessed One: "The Blessed One has been worshipped by me. The Blessed One has been worshipped by me." In other words, I have followed your directions to the end.

Now, when the monks say that to the Buddha, the Buddha replies, "Having encompassed his mind with my own mind, I already knew of the monk Vachagotta. The monk Vachagotta has attained the threefold true knowledge and has great supernormal power and might." The threefold knowledge is, of course, past lives, seeing how *kamma* works out for other beings, and liberation or the cleansing totally of those taints, those oozings.

And the Buddha says, "The deities also told me: The monk Vachagotta has attained the threefold true knowledge and has great supernormal power and might." That is what the Blessed One said. The monks were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.

So a little bit of magic tonight. I can only hope that this in some way is inspiring for you and that you will continue full steam ahead until you are completely liberated sooner rather than later.

*Buddham saranam gacchami. Dhammam saranam gacchami. Sangham saranam gacchami.*

*Namo tassa bhagavato arahato samma sambuddhassa. Namo tassa bhagavato arahato samma sambuddhassa. Namo tassa bhagavato arahato samma sambuddhassa.*

*Buddham saranam gacchami. Dhammam saranam gacchami. Sangham saranam gacchami. Dutiyampi buddham saranam gacchami. Dutiyampi dhammam saranam gacchami. Dutiyampi sangham saranam gacchami. Tatiyampi buddham saranam gacchami. Tatiyampi dhammam saranam gacchami. Tatiyampi sangham saranam gacchami.*

*Panatipata veramani sikkapadam samadiyami. Adinnadana veramani sikkapadam samadiyami. Kamesu micchacara veramani sikkapadam samadiyami. Musavada veramani sikkapadam samadiyami. Surameraya majjapamadatthana veramani sikkapadam samadiyami.*

So making sure that our body is the expression of the awakened one. Using those muscles in the lower back and the abdomen, lifting ourselves up, up the spine, sitting tall. A moment of relaxation. The brow and the jaw. Shoulders. Just acknowledging the posture, energised, up the spine, everything else, relax.

This body is subject to disease. This body is of a nature to fall ill. This body has not gone beyond sickness. This body is subject to aging. This body has not gone beyond aging. This body is now in a process of aging. This body is subject to death. This body has not gone beyond death. This body will die.

There is the unborn, undying, uncreated, uncompounded. The unconditioned. True refuge, harbour and home.

Perfect peace and contentment. Those who are mindful are in the presence of *Nibbāna*. Settling on the breath and then opening up to whatever draws the attention within that field of awareness. Just watching, just feeling, just experiencing. Intimately. It's enough.

Moments reflection Resolution

So make sure you're sitting comfortably for our evening contemplations. Turn into our own hearts, speaking gently.

May I be free of physical pain. May I be free of mental distress. May I be liberated of all my sufferings.

Bringing to mind someone we know is having a hard time. May you be free of physical pain. May you be free of mental distress. May you be liberated of all your sufferings.

And all those at this moment who are sick or suffering from mental illness, people in the process of dying, and those who have died and left grieving family, relatives and friends. People going hungry, homeless and destitute. Those having to deal with severe personal and interpersonal difficulties. All those who've been victims of prejudice, all those caught up in wars and repressive regimes and those being tortured. And there are those suffering from natural disasters and climate crisis. All the sentient beings being cruelly treated and unnecessarily slaughtered. And all who find life meaningless.

May you be free of physical pain. May you be free of mental distress. May you be liberated of all your suffering.

Radiating our care and compassion to all beings in all directions. May all beings be free of physical pain. May all beings be free of mental distress. May all beings be liberated of all their sufferings.

Thinking to mind now some moments of joyfulness, happiness that we've experienced today. And rejoicing in that. May I be joyful. May I be ever more joyful. May I experience the bliss of liberation.

Bringing to mind someone we know who has good cause to be joyful. And wish them greater joy. May you be joyful. May you be ever more joyful. May you experience the bliss of awakening.

All those at this moment who are happy and content with their lives, who are enjoying the warmth of all levels of friendship, enjoying the delights of art, nature, sport, hobbies and so on, who find their work meaningful, who enjoy the fruitfulness of their spiritual practice and who rejoice in the success of others. May you be joyful. May you be ever more joyful. May you experience the bliss of Nirvana.

Radiating our joy to all beings in all directions. May all beings be joyful. May all beings be ever more joyful. May all beings experience the bliss of *Nibbāna*.

Allowing these words to flow through us. If you are wise and want to reach the state of peace, then develop these qualities. Be upright, responsible, gentle and humble. Be easily content and need only a few things. Be less busy and live simply. Guard the senses and be modest. Do not be attached to only a few people, to the exclusion of others. Do not do the slightest thing that a wise person could blame you for. And be constantly thinking, may all beings be happy.

Whatever living beings there are, be they weak or strong, big or small, large or slender, living nearby or far away, those who've already been born and those who've yet to be born. May all beings, without exception, be happy.

Let no one deceive another or disdain any. Do not wish harm to anyone, not even when you're angry. Just as a mother would protect her only child at the risk of her own life, let the warmth of your heart go out to all beings. Let your love and goodwill spread throughout the whole world, above and below, without boundary, ill will or hatred.

Whether you are standing, walking, sitting or lying down, so long as you are awake, you should develop this affectionate mindfulness. This, they say, is the noblest way to live. And if you do not fall into unskillful ways, but live well and develop insight and are no longer attached to all the desires of the senses, then truly you'll never need to be reborn into this world again.

So feel free to join me in the chanting or offer these blessings. May you be safe, well and happy. May you live contented, in harmony, with the world.

*Santhendriyocchani bhagocchā bhagavokuleśu anānuhīdho na cākūdāṃ samācārekeñcīye nā viṇyu pāre upavādehu sukhi nā vākemi nā hāntu sābeśatā bhavāntu sukhi tātā*

*Yekechi panabhuta-thi tasa-vata-vada-va-ana-vasesam tiga-vayema-hantavam vimarasakalukatulam dita-vayema-aditaye ca-dureva-santi-avudhure*

*Bhūtā vāsaṁ bhāveśi vāsābeśātā bhāvantu sukhi tātā na paro bharaṁ nīkūpētā na tīmānyatā kathā cīnenkeṣu viyārosaṇṇāpati gāsañjā nānyamānyāsātukāṁ gīcēyā madhāyatā niyāṁ kūtā*

*Ayusai kaputanga nurake evampi saba bhutesu manasambhavaye aparimanam metenca sabalokasni manasambhavaye aparimanam udanga doca tiri anca asampatanga veranga sapatam*

May all beings be happy.

Very good. Don't forget, from now till we fall asleep is also part of our practice. Make it simple, take it easy, stay with the one who knows. Put something lovely in the heart, slip away into deep oblivion, only to wake to make the best of the day. May I wish you all a very peaceful night.