Ethical Maxims for a
Marginally Inhabitable Planet
David Schenck* and Larry R. Churchill†
ABSTRACT Bioethics has largely neglected the Anthropocene and its ethical
challenges. This essay asks which ethical norms will serve us well in the face of the
coming climate catastrophe. It sketches the climate changes likely for the year 2031 and
offers six adaptive maxims, drawn from bioethics work in ICUs and hospices, to guide
us through the devastation and transition following environmental and social collapse.
These six maxims are: work hard to grasp the immensity of the change; cultivate rad-
ical hope; have a line in the sand; appreciate the astonishing opportunity of life at this
time; train your body and mind; and act for the future generations of all species. Be-
cause we are already in an environmental collapse and the beginnings of social collapse,
these maxims are relevant today as well as for the future.
The new solidarity of fate is as yet nowhere matched by the solidarity of our
feelings, let alone our actions.
—Z. Bauman (2009)
E
very person living on the planet now, and all who will be born, will be
impacted by the climate emergency of the Anthropocene. In this essay we
challenge bioethicists specifically to think about what resources our field may
have to offer for addressing the moral crisis this development represents, as well
*Former Director of Ethics, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston.
†Emeritus Professor of Medical Ethics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN.
Email: larry.churchill@vanderbilt.edu.
Perspectives in Biology and Medicine, volume 64, number 4 (autumn 2021): 494–510.
© 2021 by Johns Hopkins University Press
494

Ethical Maxims for a Marginally Inhabitable Planet
as the new moral challenges and dilemmas it will generate. In particular, we ad-
dress this essay and its thought experiments to our junior colleagues and former
students, who will be the ones among us who will confront the moral, social, and
environmental crises most directly.
We are both now in our 70s. Like almost all working in bioethics, we have
been asleep at the wheel for more than three decades. None of us has paid nearly
enough attention to the fact that bioethics ought primarily to be framed as ethics
for the bios, not merely for biomedicine. Van Rensselaer Potter’s Bioethics: Bridge
to the Future (1971), deserved far greater attention than it received. And there
have been others seeking to awaken us. In 1999, in his book The Great Work:
Our Way into the Future, the geologian Thomas Berry argued for a larger scope
for medicine, and concomitantly, for bioethics:
The profession of medicine must now consider its role, not only within the
context of human society, but in the context of the Earth process. A healing of
the Earth is a prerequisite for the healing of the human. Adjustment of the hu-
man to the conditions and restraints of the natural world constitutes the primary
medical prescription for human well-being. The medical profession needs to
establish a way of sustaining the species as well as the individual if the human is
to be viable as a species within the community of species. (69)
But these voices went almost completely unheeded. With a few exceptions scat-
tered over the last 15 years (Brody 2009; Johnson 2016; Lee 2017; Moreno 2005;
Pierce and Jameton 2004; Richie 2019), the field has remained steadfastly focused
on biomedicine and its issues. But now the larger viewpoint—what Berry (1999)
called “macrophase ethics”—is being forced upon us. The role of tipping points
and cascade effects is now much clearer and more terrifying. The higher qual-
ity of data has shown how much faster things are moving than was previously
thought, and the new amounts of historical data have shown us how quickly
change can happen. On top of that, better modeling shows us more clearly just
how impossible things will get on an Earth at an increase of 3° Celsius (C)—or
even 2 or 2.5.
A Barely Conceivable Challenge
The specific aim of this essay is to explore what ethical maxims might guide us
in the year 2031. Our assumption is that the current devastating trajectory for
global warming will continue, or deviate only slightly. We wish we could be
more optimistic, but there is little reason to think that technological remedies of
sufficient scale are achievable any time soon, or that needed lifestyle adjustments
in energy consumption are feasible—especially for American culture. Hence, a
2.5° C rise in global temperature over preindustrial levels is a strong possibility,
possibly as early as 2041. If this is the case, humanity will be facing social, finan-
autumn 2021 • volume 64, number 4 495

David Schenck and Larry R. Churchill
cial, and political collapse on a global scale. There will be death and suffering
from immediate climate events of unprecedented magnitude, such as frequent
and severe storms, flooding, heat waves, and fires, resulting in famine, food and
water shortages, pandemics, wars large and small, and economic and social in-
securities on a level only the poorest of nations have ever experienced. We can
always hope for less devastation, but typical American optimism at this juncture
bespeaks either ignorance or denial. Had we responded 30 years ago, when the
science was already clear enough to motivate different policies, we might hope
for more, but now, in 2021, the task is increasingly difficult, and the timeframe
for adjustment is radically shortened. Given these assumptions, it becomes im-
portant to ask what kind of ethics—what kind of moral guidance for living in this
severely depleted environment—will be needed. The challenge of getting our
bodies as well as our minds around the hyper-complex phenomenon of the An-
thropocene is staggering enough. But when combined with the projected ethical
challenges and existential agonies these environmental transformations will entail,
the prospect becomes almost unthinkable. Yet we must face these issues, for the
alternative is moral nihilism.
It is important to grasp that our situation constitutes a singularity. There is no
previous extinction event in recorded history to reflect on and learn from. As
Mark Lynas (2020) has observed, one would have to “wind the geological clock
back about 3 million years, to an epic called the Pliocene, to encounter a world
where global temperatures averaged 2–3 degrees higher than at the start of the
20th century.” We do have five other mass extinction events to bring to our
consideration of this sixth mass extinction event, and we also have the extinction
of other species who reached an evolutionary dead end, all of which we could
use to model the possible eventual end of Homo sapiens. But just as knowing that
other people have died is not the same as realizing that we ourselves will die, so
too knowing that other species go extinct is not the same as fully grasping the
possibility of the extinction of our own species. And, of course, making the leap
from our own personal death—hard as that may be to grasp—to the possible end
of human life itself will hardly be easy. Human extinction is not currently on the
horizon, but as the planet becomes less and less hospitable to other species, we
can no longer assume that it will always be hospitable to us. How to cancel the
assumption that human life will go on indefinitely after our individual death? To
even pose this possibility is to generate, for most of us, a degree of anxiety and
distress that makes it difficult even to continue the inquiry.
But that precisely is the point; that precisely is why it is important to push on.
And what we suggest is that we would be well served to look in new directions
for resources. So far, we have relied on scientists and investigative journalists to
keep us informed and to rally us to action. But their work has induced a curious,
counter-intuitive phenomenon: the domestication of horror. Scientists study and
measure; journalists interpret and report. The better job scientists and journalists
496 Perspectives in Biology and Medicine

Ethical Maxims for a Marginally Inhabitable Planet
do in analyzing and explaining things, the more they tame the horror of what is
coming. Furthermore, they teach us to approach the Anthropocene as observers,
but this is problematic: no one will be an observer at an increase of 3° C.
We must move from a cognitive, observer understanding of our situation to a
felt embodiment of our predicament, from intellectual knowledge to bodily ac-
knowledgment. Resources for reflection may possibly be found in practical disci-
plines developed for dealing with human extremes, such as refugee communities,
famines, and end-of-life scenarios. Resources may also be found in communities
that have faced immense suffering: indigenous peoples, survivors of concentra-
tion camps and solitary confinement, and oppressed or enslaved communities of
color. We are recommending, in short, that we consult people who have dealt
with situations where one set of hopes, and all fantastical thinking, have to be
abandoned, and new radical hope has to be found. Our own contribution to this
discussion will draw on our decades of experience in clinical bioethics consulta-
tion, which has focused on care and decision making in catastrophic, life-threat-
ening, and end-of-life situations.
We make no claim to finality or completeness for the ethical maxims we will
highlight below. Our intention is to contribute to the nascent conceptualization
and discussion of the barely conceivable and yet largely undiscussed catastrophe
of global warming. We encourage other bioethicists, as well as those with expe-
rience with endangered communities, to join this discussion. All of us as human
beings are finally being forced to confront this climate emergency: it is not off in
the future. The recent Australian and European flooding is climate flooding, just
as the California fires of 2020 and 2021 are climate fires. Confronting our predic-
ament means facing head-on the oft-avoided and grim fact that our children and
grandchildren, and their descendants on down the line, will be dealing with the
ramifications of the Anthropocene for decades and centuries to come.
The World in 2031
So what will the world be like in 2031? Start here: we are carbonizing the at-
mosphere at an alarming rate. Half of the total carbon pollution on Earth has
been emitted in the last 30 years, notably after there was scientific consensus that
greenhouse gases (GHGs)—carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide—are a
grave threat. Temperature accelerations are causing polar ice to melt, permafrost
regions to shrink, and oceans to warm and rise. Hurricanes and other severe
weather events are increasing in number and severity. Houston has had a so-
called “once every 500-year storm” in each of the past three years. The fires in
California and Oregon are unprecedented and promise to worsen in frequen-
cy and devastation. Meanwhile, tropical rain forests in places like Brazil, which
store and thus help control carbon emissions, are being systematically cleared for
farming and ranching. Changing consumption habits have also fueled the rise of
autumn 2021 • volume 64, number 4 497

David Schenck and Larry R. Churchill
GHGs. The increase in meat eating in developing countries like China is a no-
table example. It is estimated that the GHGs emitted from all livestock globally
accounts for 14.5 % of all GHGs (FAO 2020).
What will be the effects of global warming? The Paris Agreement of 2015,
signed by 196 nations, is an aspiration to keep global warming to below 1.5° C
above preindustrial levels. We are currently at 1.1, and a rise to 2.3° is already
locked into the atmosphere from the carbon we have emitted in the past 30 years,
even if we went to zero emissions today. Just how soon we will reach the 2.3°
level is uncertain, but every day of continued emissions brings it sooner. If we
link temperature change to sea level rise, 1.5° C in global warming translates into
a rise of 1–2.5 feet. If this goal is not met, a 2° C rise in temperatures means a sea
level rise of 3–6 feet, affecting everyone on the globe. Perhaps most notably, the
number of climate refugees from flooding, fires, and drought would enlarge, to as
many as 245 million people. If global warming reaches 3.5–4° C over preindus-
trial levels, sea level rise will be 22–25 feet, with devastation of almost unimag-
inable magnitude (Maslin 2014; Wallace-Wells 2019). Massive deaths, especially
among the world’s poorest populations, will occur as a result of uninhabitable
land, food and water shortages, and the subsequent breakdown of economies and
national governments. To use potable water as just one index, currently a quarter
of Earth’s population is water stressed. This means that 1.95 billion people cur-
rently struggle to meet their daily needs for clean water. By 2030, the increased
salination of irrigated farmland, the evaporation caused by increased heat, and
frequent flooding of coastal areas will mean that an additional billion people will
be without a safe source of drinkable water (Maslin 2014).
Another index is infectious diseases. Vector organisms, such as mosquitoes, are
sensitive to changes like water-surface temperature, humidity, moisture, and de-
forestation. Climate warming would affect both the scope, intensity, and season-
ality of infectious diseases such as malaria and cholera. In general, global warming
will mean a substantial increase in transmission of disease worldwide (Maslin
2014). This is to say nothing of health events such as heat emergencies, mental
health disorders, and broader health problems caused by declining food supply,
food safety, and its consequences (Jameton 2016).
How fast will all this happen? If a business-as-usual pattern prevails and warn-
ing signs are ignored, a 2.5–3° C rise could occur as early as the early 2030s,
3–4° by mid-century, and a 5–6° rise by 2100 (Lynas 2020). Much depends on
which scientific modeling of climate change turns out to be the correct one.
For example, it is still unknown whether temperature will rise at a predictably
steady pace with the rise of GHGs, or whether there is a tipping point, caused
by a complex of feedback loops, beyond which devastating changes cascade and
accelerate (Bendell 2020). What we know about past climate changes is that they
appear to have been abrupt, and climate models for these sudden changes are
hard to simulate. Nonlinear, cascading changes in the severity of global warming
498 Perspectives in Biology and Medicine

Ethical Maxims for a Marginally Inhabitable Planet
and its accompanying catastrophes is a high probability. Much depends as well
on how quickly the world can move to green technologies like solar and wind
power, electric cars, and built structures with zero GHG emissions (Miller 2020).
Yet scaling up technologies such as these usually requires decades. And even if
massive technological changes in how energy is produced all work perfectly, all
over the globe, they will be insufficient if the cultural patterns of consumptive
capitalism, economies based on growth, and habits of increasing—rather than
curtailing—energy use persist.
Mitigation and Adaptation, Collapse and Transition
Mitigation and adaptation represent two prominent ways to talk about surviving
global warming. Mitigation means lessening the degrading effects of the Anthro-
pocene, usually through technological ingenuity. Adaptation means accommo-
dating to a new human experience through moral, social, economic, and political
adjustments. These are not, of course, mutually exclusive, since any mitigating
strategies will also involve adaptations, and successful adaptations both require
some degree of mitigation and may also uncover novels strategies for lessening
the rate of environmental degradation.
There are numerous reports of the promise of mitigating geotechnologies for
carbon capture, such as vacuuming carbon dioxide out of the air and sending it
into space or turning it into rock, reforestation, shooting particles into space to
block sunlight, and quick conversions to solar and wind energy to replace coal
and other fossil fuels (Kolbert 2021). Yet a true turnaround of our carbon-based
economy will not come easily or quickly. Even in the US and Europe, where
global warming is perhaps most widely understood, the political obstacles are
daunting. The fossil fuel industry has hidden its own decades-long research show-
ing the degrading effects for the Earth resulting from rapacious coal, gas, and oil
production. Their legislative lobbies are well entrenched and powerful, and these
companies—much like the tobacco companies in the mid-20th century—have
shown clearly that they are willing to tolerate a great deal of human suffering in
order to pursue profits. In addition, it is highly unlikely that the growing carbon
footprints of China, India, and other rising industrial giants will be sufficiently
curtailed. Reliance on mitigation through technological innovation looks more
like fantasy and folly than prudence. While we believe that an all-out effort to
engineer and adopt cleaner technologies should be mounted, counting on these
as the solution grossly underestimates the magnitude of the task and amount of
social and political change required. Thus, we are focused in this essay on moral
and social adaptation.
If, as is likely, mitigation is too late, or if it fails completely, adaptation will
be the task. And thinking seriously about adaptation means thinking about col-
lapse—for some forms of collapse seem inevitable and part of what adaptation
autumn 2021 • volume 64, number 4 499

David Schenck and Larry R. Churchill
will have to take into account. “Collapsology” is a nascent field (Servigne and
Stevens 2020), and thinking in this way is not a matter of counseling people to
give up. It is suggesting the cultural equivalent of “advance directives.” If you
find yourself in a spot where mitigation has failed, and adaptation is what must
be done, what will you be focused on? Will it be anger, regret, competition, sur-
vival? Or will it be living what life is available with as much quality as possible?
We think it likely that by 2031 mitigation will be seen to have largely failed,
and that adaptation to social and environmental collapse will be the task that is
left. We assume that this means major portions of the planet will be facing the
kinds of major transitions that people face in hospitals, ICUs, and hospices every
day.
It is impossible to know with any certainty how severe the environmental and
social collapse will be—in most places, it will probably not be as bad as the total
lawlessness of “Mad Max” scenarios. Yet radical shifts will be required every-
where to manage a future more altered in living conditions and expectations that
anything in human memory.
The second pairing, collapse and transition, is needed because both environ-
mental and social “collapse” have to be part of any realistic assessment. And while
neither kind of collapse is likely to be total, we must talk also of “transition.” If
a total collapse (of either kind) occurs, it is more likely to come from engineer-
ing misadventures in the efforts at mitigation, not from global warming per se.
(Shooting particles into space to block the sun’s rays seems a likely candidate for
this kind of blundering hubris.) Good adaptation methods figure heavily into
whatever transition may be possible, making for a softer landing and shorter
horror, with more resources surviving to power recovery on other side. But to
be clear, some environmental and social collapse seems unavoidable, meaning
suffering and death on a scale no one alive has ever seen. Hence, a caveat: the use
of these pairs of stark terms—mitigation and adaptation, collapse and transition—
when used as a shorthand, as we are now doing, can become an intellectualized,
distancing force shielding us from the horrid realities under discussion. We must
move with care so as not to leave the distress behind, stewing in our bodies
and psyches, while we talk abstractions. Any hope of mitigation or adaptation,
or transiting out of social collapse, will require all the cognitive and emotional
resources we have—minds and bodies all working with knowledge and in ac-
knowledgment, and in concert.
Six Ethical Maxims for a Time of Collapse
Unlike principles, which are guides for how to think, pointing out moral values
which could guide our cognitive processes, maxims are short guides for how to
act, and they suggest practices to which we should become habituated. They of-
ten take the form of wisdom sayings and draw less from modern philosophy than
500 Perspectives in Biology and Medicine

Ethical Maxims for a Marginally Inhabitable Planet
from ancient philosophy and wisdom literature. Maxims are less how to analyze
and choose and more how to be. They constitute ideas that must be practiced
to be fully understood. In this way they resemble more the moral virtues than
principled decision guides so familiar to bioethicists.
When describing the need for striking and memorable maxims, Pierre Hadot
(1995) puts it this way:
when the time comes, they can help us accept such [catastrophic] events, which
are, after all, part of the course of nature; we will thus have these maxims and
sentences “at hand.” What we need are persuasive formulae . . . which we can
repeat to ourselves in difficult circumstances, so as to check movements of fear,
anger, or sadness. The exercise of meditation [on maxims] is an attempt to con-
trol inner discourse, in an effort to render it coherent.
Thus, in the sense we employ here, maxims are slogans, mnemonic reminders,
and ultimately spiritual exercises. In a crisis, shorthand reminders of core values
work better than principles that require reflective interpretation and application.
In addition, the basic principles we now use most often in bioethics were crafted
for an age of relative abundance, stability, and progress. Meditating on maxims
ahead of time helps to shapes a more realistic view of the world and habituates
us, so that when the time comes, we are more likely to behave in a way ethically
appropriate to the reality before us. In short, maxims can be especially useful
in times of moral crisis and major cultural change. They help establish condi-
tions that will preserve moral creativity and resourcefulness. They can be essential
moral components for surviving the inevitable transitions before us.
Maxims present means of living one’s life in a coherent and honorable way in
the midst of great trouble. This is in significant part why we are proposing max-
ims, and not principles or theories. An autonomy-driven ethic, pictured as enact-
ed by rational, independent agents—whether deontological or utilitarian—fits all
too well with the neoliberal world order, under which regime the Anthropocene
has accelerated. Both the dominance of the hyper-individualistic autonomy ethic
characteristic of neoliberalism and the attendant ubiquity of the utilitarian calcu-
lus—and indeed the neoliberal order itself—are inconceivable without the abun-
dance, even superfluity, sponsored by fossil fuels. We thus endorse the critique of
principlism and utilitarianism found in the ethics of care. But we are here looking
deeper—we are looking for how the very idea of ethical behavior can survive in
extreme conditions. Because we know that often it does not.
And this is where maxims and bioethics comes together. The maxims have
ancient origins. Variants of them have been followed when dealing with human
catastrophes in the past, mostly in periods in which there was far less optimism,
reliance on rational analysis, or faith in technical ingenuity. But, equally as deci-
sive, we have seen these maxims at work in hospitals and hospices. Much of what
we know about them has been learned from patients and families while doing
autumn 2021 • volume 64, number 4 501

David Schenck and Larry R. Churchill
ethics consultation or working in ICUs and hospices. And while it is true that
collapse will involve a collection of large-scale events, all impacts will be individ-
ual and personal as well. What we have observed in the field confirms, we would
argue, teachings of the world’s wisdom traditions that have stood the test of times
of scarcity and hardship, of social disruption, of natural catastrophe.
To be clear, we are not arguing that these maxims are the total ethics needed
for the Anthropocene. To begin with, the complicity of our ethical traditions in
creating the Anthropocene must be acknowledged, and this ought to prompt a
revolution in approach to the foundations of bioethics. Perhaps an ethics of care
should come to the fore, and an ethic of biophilia, as expounded by Eric Fromm
(1973) and especially by Edward O. Wilson (1984)—developed in Bioethics: A
Path Forward (forthcoming) by Nancy King, Gail Henderson, and Larry Chur-
chill—should be carefully examined for its value as a foundational norm. And
then there will be the many specific activities aimed at mitigation of the ongoing
crisis that will certainly be needed. What we offer here is but a bare beginning.
Our intention is to provoke discussion and to provide a fruitful place for that
discussion to begin.
For each of the six maxims that follow we provide:
• Maxim: a formulation cast as an injunction, as is common in wisdom tradi-
tions;
• Basis: vignettes and examples from ethics consultation and bioethics that illus-
trate or clarify the injunctions, and texts from the 20th and 21st centuries that
have been helpful to us in our reflections on the Anthropocene;
• Extrapolation: suggestions of how the maxim and basis will be useful in a time
of climate emergency.
Maxim 1: Work Hard to Grasp the Immensity.
Realize how fiendishly difficult it is to grasp the scope of climate devastation
oneself. Realize how hard it is for others. Effective strategy, as well as compas-
sion, require carefully assessing the capacity of one’s listeners. In keeping with
this, these maxims suggest a progression. One step at a time. Begin small. Asking
people to go beyond their capacity can be cruel and is generally counterproduc-
tive.
Basis. As every clinical ethics consultant knows, it is always difficult to accept
bad news that has a finality to it, like a terminal or crippling diagnosis. But some
things are even more difficult than that. Some turns of events demand a change
in one’s whole view of the world. We are thinking here in particular of cases in
neonatal units where young, often first-time parents face their newly born chil-
dren who have startlingly awful diagnoses and conditions. One of the very worst
we have ever worked with is a severe case of Osteogenesis imperfecta, a condition
502 Perspectives in Biology and Medicine

Ethical Maxims for a Marginally Inhabitable Planet
where the bones in the newborn’s body break incredibly easily. Bone formation
is flawed. There is essentially no reliable skeleton, and nurses changing diapers
know they are breaking bones every time they move the child. This is not only a
tragedy; it is something that goes beyond the bounds of the conceivable for many
young parents. The world simply cannot be the kind of place where this can
happen. And yet it is. And so the parents must reconstitute their world simply to
be able to acknowledge what is in front of them.
Likewise, working with end-of-life scenarios, ethicists become acquainted
with all manner of premature and tragic deaths. We can all think of cases of this
kind that stretched our moral sensibilities: the young mother dying of unde-
tectable cancer, leaving three kids behind; the star athlete dying of heat stroke
through the neglect of his coaches; the healthy middle-aged man born with a
Berry aneurysm that suddenly ruptures and kills him. Senseless events. How can
the world be like this?
But to move beyond them, as we know from working with patients and
families, it is essential to grasp just exactly what has happened. We also know
that when that is done, new possibilities can be found on the other side of what
looked like the endgame.
Extrapolation. The very possibility of environmental and subsequent social col-
lapse is similarly inconceivable for most of us. How can humans have had this
much impact on the natural order itself? Can we possibly unknowingly have per-
petrated the extinction of thousands upon thousands of other species, and untold
suffering of our own species?
The tragedies of bioethics work can give us insight into the moral nihilism
senseless suffering can open onto. By moral nihilism we mean not only that past
norms seem to lose their validity, but that ‘right and wrong’ as ways of inter-
preting our world are no longer anchored anywhere. And yet this sense of moral
vacuity can in turn help us appreciate how difficult it is to face the Anthropocene
directly. Moments of moral paralysis seem, in fact, to be a common experience
for those coming to grips with the climate emergency and all that it implies. A
dose of moral nihilism may actually be essential for getting to the end of ordinary
hope and allowing us to come truly into radical hope—to tap the resources that
lie on the other side of ordinary hope, optimism, and reasonableness.
Maxim 2: Cultivate Radical Hope.
The kind of hope that reappears after optimism has died is hope that can be
relied on. It is generally a hope that doesn’t talk about or think of itself as hope.
This means realizing the dangers of optimistic hope, of fantasyland and magical
thinking. First, we must own our grief and anger. Second comes the realization
that blaming ourselves and others doesn’t help. Only when one reaches a certain
level of despair can new resources of hope emerge, in oneself and in the new
world in which one finds oneself. What is called for is a faith in a possible future,
autumn 2021 • volume 64, number 4 503

David Schenck and Larry R. Churchill
however improbable, embedded in action totally oriented to the situation (Lear
2006).
Basis. All of us who have worked in ICUs and with palliative care and hospice
teams have watched patients and families adjust to what had seemed a hopeless
situation. We recall one formerly homeless patient saying to us, “Well, Doc, if it
weren’t for AIDS, I’d be dead”—meaning that in coming to terms with AIDS,
he had gotten himself off the street and had broken his addictions. We are also
familiar with studies showing that survival rates for certain kinds of cancers are
better for patients in hospice than out. By accepting a terminal diagnosis and re-
defining what counts as healing, an unexpected path for extended life opens up.
Confirming this, the bioethicist Judith Andre (2015) talks about “open hope”;
Joanna Macy speaks of “active hope” (Macy and Johnstone 2012); and Gabriel
Marcel (1978) speaks of the hope that can arise when “hope-for” is released.
Likewise, Albert Camus’s 1947 novel The Plague and his 1946 essay Neither Victim
nor Executioners are essential resources.
Extrapolation. How will you behave when there is no ordinary hope? What
are the kinds of things you will always want to do—the way you want always to
be, whether there is hope or not? For example, consider the central virtues of the
hope that emerges beyond optimism: being kind, not abandoning people, behav-
ing with integrity. The key is knowing that there is almost always room for some-
thing positive to be done. There are always openings, always gaps in the gloom.
Practice for how you will behave when there is no more left to do—that is,
when no telos-action or results-oriented action of any kind is possible.
Maxim 3: Have a Line in the Sand.
Know that there are some things you will not do, some modes of living you
will not embrace. Know that there are lives worse than death. Be prepared to die.
Basis. This maxim is the core insight behind the practice of formulating ad-
vance directives. At what point is it time to stop? We are thinking of hospice pa-
tients who asked that their tube feedings be stopped, and the candidate for a brain
surgery to de-bulk a benign tumor who declined the procedure, because life in
the hospital and rehab was simply unpalatable to him. (Interestingly enough, he
lived far longer than his projected life expectancy had he had the surgery.)
For those of us in health care, there are the sobering lessons from the horrific
situation that developed at Memorial Hospital in New Orleans after Hurricane
Katrina, as recounted in Sheri Fink’s outstanding book, Five Days at Memorial:
Life and Death in a Storm-Ravaged Hospital (2013). As floodwaters rose in the days
after the storm, the hospital lost power when the grid failed, and then lost backup
power when their generators were swamped. With no power, the ventilators
and other life-supporting machines stopped working. There were no functioning
monitors. Without air conditioning, temperatures in the sealed units rose rapidly.
As the days went by, shortages of food and medicine developed. Gunfire was
504 Perspectives in Biology and Medicine

Ethical Maxims for a Marginally Inhabitable Planet
heard in the streets; police withdrew from the area because of the danger. Under
these conditions, impossible triage decisions were made, and finally, over a dozen
critically ill patients were injected with lethal doses of morphine and sedatives.
Extrapolation. Post-Katrina New Orleans presents us with the kinds of scenar-
ios that can be expected to be a regular occurrence as natural and social collapse
unfold. Useful reflections on how to behave in such extreme situations come
from the concentration camp writings of Victor Frankl and Etty Hillesum. There
is also the example of Ludwig Wittgenstein, who urged his student Drury, who
was preparing to go into combat in World War II, to decide ahead of time not
to engage in hand-to-hand combat, but to be willing to be killed instead (Monk
1990).
Know what you will do, and what you will not. Max Weber formulated it this
way in his classic lecture “Politics as a Vocation” (1919):
it is immensely moving when a mature man—no matter whether old or young
in years—is aware of a responsibility for the consequences of his conduct and
really feels such responsibility with heart and soul. He then acts by following
an ethic of responsibility and somewhere he reaches the point where he says:
“Here I stand; I can do no other.” That is something genuinely human and
moving. And every one of us who is not spiritually dead must realize the possi-
bility of finding himself at some time in that position.
Considering the likely realities of collapse and transition, it seems probable that
many people will find themselves facing these kinds of decisions, and something
like an internal, ethical “advance directive” could prove beneficial. This is why,
for example, emergency responders run through practice scenarios. The body
and the imagination need to be encouraged to engage directly that which lies
outside the normal. True, drawing lines in sands that are constantly shifting in a
tricky business. One must be prepared, as well, to pivot and go in unexpected
directions. But these pivots are more likely to be done well if one has prepared
by imagining the worst and drawing practice lines in the sand.
Maxim 4: Appreciate the Astonishing and Unique Opportunity.
Appreciate the opportunity you have to accompany humanity in this extraor-
dinary transition and to be present to the earth and the biosphere at this time.
Appreciate how amazing our bodies are, as a perceiving sensorium, as movement
and in activity, sponsoring emotion and thought. Be amazed at the intercon-
nectedness of things and their astonishing complexity. Think small, alongside
thinking very big.
Basis. One of the privileges of doing ethics consultation and research in clinical
bioethics is the opportunity to meet remarkable people who handle their physical
challenges with courage and grace. All of us who have done this work can think
autumn 2021 • volume 64, number 4 505

David Schenck and Larry R. Churchill
of examples. We cite here one from our book What Patients Teach (2013). The
patient has abdominal cancer and is in the last weeks of her life:
There is no blessing like friends. I’ve had friends who came out of the wood-
work, friends I hadn’t seen in a long time or who I only saw infrequently. I
have been treated so lovingly; it’s just been overwhelming to me. I’m so very
grateful that I had this year to spend this time with these people. It’s interest-
ing. The two friends who have helped me the most have both said to me that
they consider it a privilege to be able to do this. Which goes to show that many
times the people in your life are willing to do more to help you out than one
might have guessed. (109)
There are also well-known accounts of illness that confirm the blessings that
can come in extremity if one is prepared to receive them. At the end of his ac-
count of his long dying of AIDS, Harold Brodkey (1996) says: “Peace? There was
never any in the world. But in the pliable water, under the sky, unmoored, I am
traveling now and hearing myself laugh, at first with nerves and then with genu-
ine amazement. It is all around me” (177). And Arthur Frank (2002) summarizes
his reflections on his own illnesses, and illness in general, this way: “The ultimate
value of illness is that it teaches us the value of being alive; this is why the ill are
not just charity cases, but a presence to be valued . . . . Illness restores the sense of
proportion that is lost when we take life for granted” (120). Cultivating gratitude:
What could be more important? This is the message—from our patients, from the
dying, from our great teachers.
Extrapolation. Our patients, and many people who have faced ethical extremi-
ty, teach the importance of the “little things.” We are thinking of Masha Gessen’s
interview with the former Gulag prisoner talking about his old camp:
You should see it [Site Perm-36] in the summer. Some evenings there—the
light is special, and the air—sometimes you’d be going behind the outhouse,
because inside it was rather unpleasant and inconvenient and you avoided it if
you could, so there you’d be, taking a piss behind the outhouse, and the air was
like you could touch it, and the smell of those linden trees, and the sound of
the birds singing. (Gessen and Friedman 2018)
This marvelous passage brings to mind the woman we interviewed years ago who
had lost fingers in a textile mill, but whose main memory of work, the memory
she stressed in her account, was of how beautiful the afternoon sunlight was as it
shone on and through the running threads in the very spinning looms that had
claimed her fingers.
Learn then to appreciate how amazing nature is, even in (or especially) the
face of loss and change. Think of the amazing greens one finds when walking in
landscapes after intense wildfire, or of the astonishing color photographs of Rich-
506 Perspectives in Biology and Medicine

Ethical Maxims for a Marginally Inhabitable Planet
ard Mosse capturing the (admittedly unearthly) beauty of the devastation of the
Amazon (Maher 2021). Joanna Macy’s teaching work is especially helpful in its
insistence on the blessing of our being alive during this amazing time: appreciate
that there is anything at all, and that we have witnessed it (Macy and Johnstone
2012).
Maxim 5: Train Your Body and Your Mind.
Learn breathing exercises. Develop the physiological capacity to deal with
despair. Despair isn’t just psychological, it’s physiological.
Learn skills for getting beyond ego—not just the cognitive limits of ego, which
many are at least familiar with pondering, but the emotional and physiological
limits of ego.
Basis. Those of us who have worked with colleagues in health care on issues
related to moral distress and burnout are familiar with the power of bodily prac-
tices to mitigate and eventually assimilate trauma of all kinds. Included in such
practices would be mindfulness, yoga, cognitive-behavioral therapy, trauma re-
lease exercises, and wellness programs (nutrition, exercise, sleep patterns).
A useful advanced skill is the capacity to shift timeframes. In imagination,
go out to geological, evolutionary, planetary, cosmic scales to get a different
view of the Anthropocene. Consider, for instance, that the merger/“collision”
of the Milky Way and Andromeda galaxies, which will take place over a period
of 5 billion years, has already begun. Next, practice returning to the timescale
of the human life cycle. From there, descend into an examination of the mo-
ment-by-moment construction of experience. At that level, as well as at the level
of the galaxies, the Anthropocene, which looms so large for us, is invisible. Final-
ly, come back once more to the human cycles of days, weeks, years, generations.
If one doesn’t return to the human cycles, one becomes a monster. But staying
always here in the human ego timeframe, one will likely die of grief or rage (both
of which have their own specific fast and slow tracks).
Extrapolation. As we have seen with the COVID-19 pandemic, in time of
severe social stress, moral distress and burnout can spread quite widely. They
impact not just health-care workers and emergency responders, but also food
workers, teachers, and mass transit personnel. Physical, psychological, and spir-
itual trauma are likely to become widespread as the climate collapses. Training
body and mind to cope will be essential to survival and to whatever sort of human
flourishing is possible on a vastly depleted planet.
Maxim 6: Act for the Future Generations of All Species.
Speak for those without voice: the poor, the future generations, other species.
Speak for the forests, the seas, the mountains.
autumn 2021 • volume 64, number 4 507

David Schenck and Larry R. Churchill
Act, personally and politically, to limit the damage being done to the bio-
sphere. Every 0.5° C increase avoided is a major victory and achievement.
Basis. For the bioethicist, the COVID-19 pandemic has been a clinic in the
interconnectedness of ethical problems, as well as the intertwining of the fates
of nations and species. Think here of the interconnections between and among
fresh meat markets in China, violated natural habitats, global trade patterns, and
their economics; the disparities in health care and vulnerability among nations,
and among populations within nations; the multiple failures of the health-care
system in protecting its workers and its patients; the catastrophic failures of polit-
ical leadership and the undermining of confidence in science and medicine. And
then boil all this down to triage policies, and staffing decisions, and the allocation
of PPE. All connected, all one giant web.
Extrapolation. It is essential to find creative ways to cultivate an in-depth, emo-
tional as well as intellectual understanding of interconnection, so that when we
act for a species or a group, we are acting for everything in the global web. We
are all in this together, all tied together, all forming a multiplex unity. Acting
with a sense of solidarity, involving mutuality and reciprocity, the development
and maintenance of trust, is essential for decent survival. This understanding is
the only intelligent basis for strategy and research. This insight is the foundation
for the basic compassion involved in the stress on equity, distributive justice, and
the acknowledgment of the gross unfairness of the basic fact that those who have
contributed the least to the carbon catastrophe will bear the brunt of the chain of
disasters it is initiating.
The Process Has Begun
What in many ways is hardest to realize—yet must be realized—is that the col-
lapse is already here. The following is a list of symptoms of systems already badly
out of kilter: the COVID-19 pandemic; the recent Houston storms; the wildfires
in California and Australia; and the grid collapses in Texas and California. It is
clearly too late to avoid the climate crisis or mitigate it in any definitive way.
Adaptation and collapse have begun, albeit in slow motion.
Unfortunately, the numbing has begun as well. We are already far too toler-
ant of massive amounts of suffering. We are currently moving toward 600,000
COVID-19 deaths in the US. This is more deaths than in all our 20th- and
21st-century wars combined. There have been over 3 million deaths worldwide,
and yet life moves along in a quasi-normal state for most of us.
Alongside this process, the temptations and provocations to ruthlessness, com-
petition, and violence will be constant. But our greatest moral threat will likely
remain the creeping normalization of catastrophe.
Which brings us back to the fundamental questions addressed by the maxims:
what kind of person will you be, and what will you teach and model for your
colleagues, your students, your families?
508 Perspectives in Biology and Medicine

Ethical Maxims for a Marginally Inhabitable Planet
We ourselves find this list of maxims daunting. But this is how maxims work.
Maxims have to do with how we do everything we do—a tone and style of
living—as well as with the implementation of certain practices. Maxims are, in
significant part, about keeping morality itself alive in a catastrophe. They demand
of us that which we have difficulty demanding from ourselves. This is why we
put forward for discussion this list of six maxims: precisely because they are so
difficult, but also—in our view—so necessary.
References
Andre, J. 2015. Worldly Virtue: Moral Ideals and Contemporary Life. Lanham, MD: Lexing-
ton Books.
Bauman, Z. 2009. Does Ethics Have a Chance in a World of Consumers? Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.
Bendell, J. 2020. “Deep Adaptation: A Map for Navigating Climate Tragedy.” IFLAS
Occas Pap 2: 1–35.
Berry, T. 1999. The Great Work: Our Way into the Future. New York: Bell Tower.
Brodkey, H. 1996. This Wild Darkness: The Story of My Death. New York: Holt.
Brody, H. 2009. The Future of Bioethics. New York: Oxford University Press.
Camus, A. 1946. Neither Victims nor Executioners: An Ethic Superior to Murder. Eugene, OR:
Wipf and Stock, 1986.
Camus, A. 1947. The Plague. Trans. S. Gilbert. New York: Random House, 1991.
Churchill, L., J. Fanning, and D. Schenck. 2013. What Patients Teach: The Everyday Ethics
of Healthcare. New York: Oxford University Press.
Fink, S. 2013. Five Days at Memorial: Life and Death in a Storm-Ravaged Hospital. New
York: Crown.
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations. 2020. “Key Facts and
Findings.” http://www.fao.org/news/story/en/item/197623/icode/.
Frank, A. 2002. At the Will of the Body: Reflections on Illness. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Fromm, E. 1973. The Anatomy of Human Destructiveness. New York: Holt, Rinehart and
Winston.
Gessen, M., and M. Friedman. 2018. Never Remember: Searching for Stalin’s Gulags in Pu-
tin’s Russia. New York: Columbia Global Reports.
Hadot, P. 1995. Philosophy as a Way of Life: Spiritual Exercises from Socrates to Foucault, ed.
A. Davidson, trans M. Chase. Oxford: Blackwell.
Jameton, A. 2016. “Time Frames for Saving the Planet.” Ethics Policy Environ 19 (2):
136–40.
Johnson, J. 2016. “Bioethics as a Way of Life: The Radical Bioethos of Van Rensselaer
Potter.” Lit Med 34 (1): 7–24.
Kolbert, E. 2021. Under a White Sky: The Nature of the Future. New York: Penguin Ran-
dom House.
Lear, J. 2006. Radical Hope: Ethics in the Face of Cultural Devastation. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.
Lee, L. 2017. “‘A Bridge Back to the Future’: Public Health, Bioethics and Environmen-
tal Ethics.” Am J Bioethics 17 (9): 5–12.
autumn 2021 • volume 64, number 4 509

David Schenck and Larry R. Churchill
Lynas, M. 2020. Our Final Warning: Six Degrees of Climate Emergency. London: Fourth
Estate.
Macy, J., and C. Johnstone. 2012. Active Hope: How to Face the Mess We’re in Without
Going Crazy. Novato, CA: New World Library.
Maher, D. M. 2021. “‘They Are Living Maps’: How Richard Mosse Captured Environ-
mental Damage in the Amazon.” Guardian, April 6. https://www.theguardian.com/
artanddesign/2021/apr/06/richard-mosse-irish-photographer-amazon-environmen-
tal-damage.
Marcel, G. 1978. Homo Viator: Introduction to a Metaphysic of Hope. Trans E. Craufurd.
Gloucester, MA: Peter Smith.
Maslin, M. 2014. Climate Change: A Very Short Introduction. 3rd ed. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Miller, D. 2020. Solved: How the World’s Great Cities are Fixing the Climate Crisis. Toronto:
University of Toronto Press.
Monk, R. 1990. Ludwig Wittgenstein: The Duty of Genius. New York: Penguin.
Moreno, J. 2005. “In the Wake of Katrina: Has Bioethics Failed?” Am J Bioethics 5 (5):
18–19.
Pierce, J., and A. Jameton. 2004. The Ethics of Environmentally Responsible Health Care.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Potter, V. 1971. Bioethics: Bridge to the Future. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall.
Richie, C. 2019. Principles of Green Bioethics: Sustainability in Health Care. East Lansing:
Michigan State University Press.
Servigne, P., and R. Stevens. 2020. How Everything Can Collapse. Trans. A. Brown. Med-
ford, MA: Polity Press.
Wallace-Wells, D. 2019. The Uninhabitable Earth: Life After Warming. New York: Tim
Duggan.
Weber, M. 1919. “Politics as a Vocation.” In From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology, ed. H.
Gerth and C. Mills, 77–128. New York: Oxford University Press, 1946.
Wilson, E. 1984. Biophilia. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
510 Perspectives in Biology and Medicine