Preparing for Climate Change - First Ethical Maxim
This follows from the August tip describing six maxims that we can practice to fortify ourselves for
the environmental and social consequences of climate change. The first maxim asks us to “work hard
to grasp the immensity”; this tip won’t discuss the likelihood or extent of the consequences we can
expect (if interested you could read the paper that suggested the maxims) but explore some links
between the first maxim and the Dhamma.
The maxim fits perfectly with the Buddha’s advice that we come to terms with the fact that
everything inside us and outside is in flux, vulnerable, dependent on circumstance. We plan our
career, family, diary, around the presumption that we will continue to have a stable food and water
supply, electricity, public transport, schools, internet, the rule of law, government. All of these are
put in jeopardy because of climate change. But their absence is, for most of us, unthinkable. The
mind skims over the implications, we might feel blocked or frightened or we might doze off or
restlessly seek distraction. Soon we’re back to ‘business as usual’.
This parallels with they way we ignore our own mortality. Intellectually we know we will die
someday, but rarely do we think about this. To overcome this reluctance, the Buddha asked his
followers to deliberately expose themselves to the reality of death - to look at dead bodies, smell
them, see the flesh rotting, the maggots feeding, the residue of bones and dust, reminding
themselves “one day this will happen to my body; I am not exempt from this fate.”
To follow this approach regarding environmental and social collapse we could read relevant articles
or watch documentaries. We could talk the matter over with friends or family or look for on-line
support in coming to terms with the situation.
We should also remember that the contemplation of death is the final exercise that the Buddha lists
for mindfulness of the body. He starts with mindfulness of breathing and posture and everyday
activities. We get to know the body very intimately in life before we contemplate its death.
Similarly, we can become more mindful of the environment and social structures as they now
function to fortify ourselves for their impending collapse. We can walk in nature, paying full
attention to grass, trees, birds, sky, all the while being aware of our emotions e.g. enjoyment,
boredom. Acknowledging our reactions honestly allows us forge a deeper relationship that will
eventually transcend attachment, indifference, aversion.
This mirrors Joanna Macey’s advice to develop our relationship with nature in order to strengthen
ourselves for the challenge of climate change. After reading her book “Active Hope” I started taking
a deeper interest in nature. My daily walks slowed as wildflowers and grasses and birdsong
demanded attention. After some time I began to dread winter when the verges would be muddy and
drab, the birds silent. I worked mindfully with this anxiety and dread till one day I noticed an
underlying guilt, a feeling that I should somehow be able to give each flower the gift of everlasting
life and was failing in my task! Once I became aware of this delusion I could smile at it and enjoy my
walks again. I started to appreciate the grasses, flowers and birds as dhamma teachers. Their
message of transience and vulnerability became a gentle way of learning about my own mortality.
More recently my daily walks help me assimilate the possibility of environmental collapse. Walking
by a tree I reflect that it might not live out its natural lifespan, that its roots might already be

detecting degradation in the soil, its flowers noticing the lack of insects. Grief or anger might emerge
but sometimes these resolve into a bitter-sweet ‘hello, goodbye’ as we meet on our journeys
through life and death.
I find this next part more difficult but am trying to extend the practice to include social supports such
as food in the shops, water pouring when I turn a tap, electricity flowing when I press a switch. I
remind myself to be grateful for whatever services now work – transport, schools, hospitals, internet
and the social norms that allow me feel safe on my daily walk. The more I value these wonders, the
better I will be able to contemplate living without their immense benefits.
I also appreciate the support of others in this endeavor. If you think you might similarly benefit you
could join the Satipanya forum dedicated to practicing with the Six Maxims. Email Noirin for further
information or to register.
Some resources that are helping me ‘grasp the immensity’:
Hothouse Earth, Bill McGuire, Icon Books, 2022
This Changes Everything, Naoimi Klein, Penguin, 2014
Climate Crisis and the Global Green New Deal, Noam Chomsky & Robert Pollin, Verso, 2020
What society might look like as its structures collapse:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Lcem_tutbGc
https://www.bbc.com/future/article/20170418-how-western-civilisation-could-collapse
Gwen’s tip from the September newsbyte contained many additional resources and after our second
Climate and Dhamma Zoom session, Gwen shared Caroline Bird’s poem “Prepper”: