PPPP UUUU JJJJ AAAA VIPASSANA VERSES
All conditioned things are impermanent
When this is perceived with wisdom
Buddham pujemi
One becomes disenchanted with what cannot satisfy
Dhammam pujemi
Just this is the Path of Purification.
Sangham pujemi
I bow to the Buddha, Dhamma and Sangha
All conditioned things are unsatisfactory
VVVVAAAANNNNDDDD AAAANNNNAAAA When this is perceived with wisdom
One becomes disenchanted with what cannot satisfy
HOMAGE
Just this is the Path of Purification.
Namo tassa bhagavato arahato samma sambuddhassa!
Namo tassa bhagavato arahato samma sambuddhassa!
All conditioned things and the Unconditioned are not-self
Namo tassa bhagavato arahato samma sambuddhassa!
When this is perceived with wisdom
Homage to the Buddha, the Blessed, Noble and the Fully Self-Enlightened One!
One becomes disenchanted with what cannot satisfy
TTTTIIIISSSSAAAARRRRAAAANNNNAAAA Just this is the Path of Purification.
THE THREE REFUGES [Dhp 20 v5-7]
***
Buddham saranam gacchami
I go to the Buddha as my Refuge
There is
Dhammam saranam gacchami
The Unborn, the Undying, the Uncreated, the Unconditioned
I go to the Dhamma as my Refuge
Sangham saranam gacchami Refuge, harbour and home.
I go to the Sangha as my Refuge
Perfect contentment and peace.
Dutiyampi Buddham saranam gacchami... (repeat)
For the second time I go the Buddha.... as my Refuge
Tatiyampi Buddham saranam gacchami.... (repeat)
Just as the great ocean has only one taste, the taste of salt
For the third time..... as my Refuge
So Nibbana has only one taste, the taste of freedom.
PPPPAAAANNNNCCCCAAAA SSSS1111LLLLAAAA
THE FIVE TRAINING RULES
Panatipata veramani sikkhapadam samadiyami [Last words of the Buddha - Parinibbana Sutta]
I undertake the training rule to abstain from killing any living being All conditioned things have the nature to decay.
Adinnadana veramani sikkhapadam samadiyami Work diligently for your liberation.
I undertake the training rule not to take that which is not freely given
Kamesu micchacara veramani sikkhapadam samadiyami
I undertake the training rule to abstain from sexual misconduct
Musavada veramani sikkhapadam samadiyami
I undertake the training rule to abstain from wrong speech
Sura meraya majja pamadatthana
veramani sikkhapadam samadiyami
I undertake the training rule not to take substances that cloud the mind
SSSSaaaaddddhhhhuuuu!!!! SSSSaaaaddddhhhhuuuu!!!! SSSSaaaaddddhhhhuuuu!!!!
(Well-done!)