Could I be a fundamentalist
even a terrorist?
The Buddha talks about views and opinions as a 'thicket, a wilderness, a contortion, a
vacillation and a fetter'. In an early collection, the Nipata Sutta, he is for ever telling his
followers not to get caught up in debates. If you win you suffer from the conceit that,
therefore, you must be right. (Gandhi warns that truth can be in a minority of one!) And if
you lose you feel humiliated - even though you may be right.
To take up this position of 'I'm right you're wrong', we need to have three components:
ditthi, mano and tanha. Ditthi is the wrong view. However, even when a right view is held
with mano and tanha, then it can still be dangerous.
Mano is conceit. The Buddha points us to three conceits: I am better than; I am worse than;
and, at a more subtle level, I am equal to. The bigheadedness of 'I am better' is the most
obvious. 'I am worse' often masquerades as false humility. Humility is being content with
just the way we are. Why compare? Indeed 'all comparison is odious!' With 'I am equal
to', we feel more comfortable, but then the group we join is either superior or inferior to
another group. It is a collusive conceit. As a fundamentalist, of course, mine is THE truth -
and I have the support of others who believe likewise.
Tanha is the attachment. Whereas ditthi and mano tend to be heady, it's the attachment
that gives them stuffing. The heart clings to it. Here is the spring that torrents righteous
anger.
So to be a good Buddhist fundamentalist, I will need to have a wrong view, (it could simply
be that my view is exclusively right), the conceit that I or we are right and everyone
who disagrees with me or us is wrong and the attachment that supports my position
with 'righteous anger' and often 'cold hatred', righteously justified.
But there needs to be more, I think. Love! A constrained love, a exclusive love, no doubt.
But none the less love. A love of one's religion which one can even interpret to support
killing. A devotion to an ideal which would make the world a heaven if I make everyone
everyone believe and follow. If I were to take the next step and do away with the enemy, I
would also need a good dose of courage and believe in the reward- whether it be Nibbana or
a heavenly rebirth.
But there is also a darker side. It would seem that fundamentalists fear annihilation. They
experience the dominant culture of modernism with its commitment to cold rationality, 'pure
science', disregard of past 'holy texts', libertarian morals and a selfish capitalism that
supports hedonistic materialism as not only deeply offensive, but an overwhelming enemy.
Buddhism is not immune from such tendencies. There have been many cases of
fundamentalist thought and action. To mention only one. In the early years of independence
in Sri Lanka a senior Buddhist monk, Talduwe Somarama Thero, thought with other
conspirators that the government was undermining Buddhism and Buddhist culture. He
shot the Prime Minister, Hon S.W.R.D. Bandaranaike, who later died of his wounds. Even
today, in Sri Lanka, there are monks who have established a political party and won seats
in Parliament on the platform nationalism and fundamentalism. And there are still dreadful
things going on in Myanmar for similar reasons.
For myself, I have not found it difficult to catch some ingredients of fundamentalism within
me. I need only catch my thoughts and attendant emotions when I hear, see or read
something I disagree with or when I find myself in conversation with someone who holds
opposing views.
The trick, perhaps, is to see one's views and opinions more as perspectives. By doing so,
we may be able to accept even opposing views and come to a fuller picture and an easy
compromise (a foul word to fundamentalists, whether religious or secular). For personal
views and opinions are, by definition, never the full perspective. And this demands we let go

of conceit and attachment. No bad thing!
I dare say it may mean the end of adversarial politics and the antics of Parliament. Pity?!