Abortion, Suicide, Euthanasia, Assisted Suicide and Murder
I think the title just about covers different words we have for purposely bring to end a person’s life,
whether it’s one’s own or another’s. The argument around this area boils down to what is called in
religious circles the sanctity of life or the preciousness of human birth. Murder, the wilful taking of
another’s life out of greed, hatred and delusion, would, I think, be considered clearly unethical by
most of us. The others present a variety of ethical dilemmas. The purpose of this essay is not to go
into the intricacies of all the arguments. Here I wish only to lay the platform of ethic upon which we
can base our actions, specifically around the recent topic of assisted suicide. Approaching these
issues by way of the Noble Eightfold Path, with clarity around Right Understanding, the Right
Attitude or Intention arises and so Right Action should then follow suit.
We need to establish the meaning of life and death according to the Buddha’s teaching and then to
understand the law of kamma. Rarely is any decision to be made a simple choice between right and
wrong since ethical decisions are tempered by circumstance and context. That is why the Buddha
states the ethical law not as commandments but as ‘training rules’ sikkhapada, literally ‘footsteps of a
trainee’.
The Vinaya, the rule established for the Sangha of bhikkhus and bhikkunis, is not something the
Buddha thought out, but practical and wise as he was, it was only when someone acted unskilfully,
did he declare a rule. Some rules are to do with the definition of an institution and others with moral
law. The first four are a group known as parajika, end of life or defeat. Should a monastic transgress
these rules they are no longer a member of the order whether they confess or not. Even should they
continue to live deceptively in the order, they will know in their hearts that they are no longer a
bhikkhu or bhikkhuni.
The rule that is of interest here is the third parajika:
Should a member of the Sangha intentionally deprive a human being
of life, or search for an assassin for them, or praise the advantages of
death, or incite them to die saying for instance, ‘Friend, what use is
this wretched, miserable life to you? Death would be better for you
than life,’ or with such an idea in mind, such a purpose in mind, should
in various ways praise the advantages of death or incite them to die,
that is a defeat and they are no longer in communion.
Please note: life according to Buddhadhamma begins at conception.
This Rule states the highest form of moral rectitude and is expected of a monastic. What then would
be the arguments against abortion, euthanasia, suicide and assisted suicide? The answer lies in the
meaning of life.
A young man came to see me once and told me his partner wanted a child, but he saw no reason why
he should bring another being into samsara, a world of dukkha, an ever ongoing becoming that
cannot deliver any real happiness. I reminded him that the Buddha spoke of human birth as the most
advantageous of all in order to make spiritual progress because here we have that mixture of joy and
woe and the intelligence to see where the escape lies. In which case I said to him, in my opinion, apart
from attaining one of the four spiritual paths and fruits, there was no greater act of compassion than
to bring another being into this life and educate them in the Buddhadhamma. I didn’t see him again!
I dare say it was a bloke thing about commitment to marriage.
The Buddha gave an image to show how rare a human birth is. He asks us to imagine a vast ocean
with one log floating on the surface. Every hundred years a turtle rises to the surface. What would be
the odds of it hitting its head on that log?
Although I am a Theravada monk, I warm to the later Mahayana teaching of the Tathagatagharba
Discourse for the accent here is on that which seeks its liberation, called rather mysteriously in

Theravada the Nibbanic element, nibbana dhatu. It gives a positive spin to our quest. It points not to
the experience of Nibbana, which admittedly is the Buddha’s own preference in teaching, but what it
is that experiences Nibbana. The Buddha referred to himself as the Tathagata which translates as
Thus Gone or Thus Arrived. He refers to Nibbana as the ‘other shore’. The Buddhas and the arahants
are the ones who have arrived ‘over there’. They are the ones who have transcended this life form.
And what is it that has transcended this life form but that which knows, our intuitive awareness, sati-
panya.
Therefore, when we really grasp that this life, the whole of this life from the moment of conception to
the moment of death is a training ground, where not a moment is wasted so long as we understand
there is always something to learn – even in the most severe pain, in the most terrible depression,
despair and anguish – all of it offers us an opportunity to grow in wisdom and compassion. It cannot,
therefore, be seen as a skilful act to end one’s life prematurely or to help another do so – even at
conception.
Now that’s the ideal! But the relative world rarely offers an easy, straight forward situation and I am
sure you can think of many occasions where a persuasive argument could be made for abortion,
euthanasia, assisted suicide and suicide. It is important here to understand that unskilful does not
mean evil in the way that word is commonly used. It is evil to murder someone, but hard to call it evil
to assist someone in their suicide – someone, for instance, who may be driven to distraction with pain
or perhaps to put an end to a so-called vegetative state for we cannot know that person’s inner state.
Yet it is still unskilful to terminate a life for whatever reason for it takes away the potential for
spiritual understanding to arise within the person’s lifetime and who knows when such an
opportunity may arise again. This may seem very harsh when our dominant purpose is compassion
and indeed the wholesome result from compassion may outweigh any unwholesome result from
ending life whether it’s our own or of another. It may be a case of a willingness to bear any
unwholesome results out of compassion for another.
So from our understanding comes our intention that imbues an act with wholesomeness or
unwholesomeness. And according to the law of kamma, if we think, say or do something
unwholesome, then we will reap some unwholesome result. The same law applies, of course, to
wholesome acts. It is, then, up to us to be very clear as to our motivations should we find ourselves
in a situation where the premature ending of life seems to be an answer. It may be a smoke screen
for other subliminal intentions to argue for the alleviation of suffering, such as not wanting to suffer
pain or unable to be with someone in pain. Just because we are not aware of underlying intentions
doesn’t mean they will not affect our conditioning. We know from Western psychology that
suppressed or repressed wishes cause psychological damage. In Buddhadhamma these are our
anusaya, proclivities, inclinations, tendencies. And should we think our intention is benevolent, but
is in fact unwise and morally wrong, that will also produce unwholesome kamma. For instance, I
knew someone who was a-when-it-suits-me-communist – any way he took to Proudon’s declaration
that that all property is theft with fierce logic. He built up quite a library, thieving books and for some
reason never saw the irony! But then any unskilful act that is seen as skilful by the perpetrator
reinforces their delusion. I lost contact so I don’t know if he was ever caught or suddenly seeing the
self-deception under which he was amassing volumes had pangs of conscience and felt obliged to pay
for them. So we need to make sure that our main intention is ethically correct. Often it is only
through insight meditation, vipassana, that we become aware of our anusaya, subliminal
intentions and the strength of these ignored conditionings.
Nor would it be right to think that in committing suicide or assisting someone to do so that thereby
they escape the consequences of the act or of past actions. At the Birmingham Vihara one of our
members committed suicide and I asked Ven. Dr. Rewata Dhamma, our resident teacher, what
happens to such a person. He said he would go on committing suicide through a hundred lives.
‘Rubbish!’ was my first reaction – not out loud of course. But after some thought, I realised to commit
suicide was a very strong act of will that would produce a very strong conditioning. It was plausible to
say that every time that being came across great difficulty that would continue to be their escape.
Only when they turned around on that conditioning and refused to obey would the real escape
manifest – calling for courage and patient endurance.

These days there is often confusion between illegal and immoral. In a liberal society more and more
ethical decisions, more of personal than those of wider social effect (or so it is thought) such as
divorce, abortion, suicide, all of which were once criminal offences, are laid at the door of the
individual. Unfortunately in making unethical behaviour legal, it takes away the social stigma and
such actions soon become normal and ordinary – and easily accepted as ‘moral’. The consequence of
this is to blind people to the effect of harmful behaviour especially within themselves. In denial of
shame and guilt, there is no possibility of remorse. This turbulence in the heart is repressed by self-
righteousness which becomes ever more callous. Witness the philosophy supporting eugenics that
lead Nazis to justify killing people with mental and physical disability. So should we find ourselves in
a position of advising someone or indeed having to make such decisions for ourselves, we must be
rigorous in honesty and not fool ourselves.
Let us for the sake of discussion take three cases: those that involve the doctrine of double effect,
those that terminate life by turning off a life support machine and those that involve a patient’s desire
to die. The doctrine of double effect concerns in the main doctors, but the patient and relatives may
be part of the decision making. A patient is in a terminal condition. A doctor administers medicine to
alleviate suffering of a dying patient knowing it will kill the patient. The patient may have asked for
this or may not know it. Should the medicine be administered with the purpose to hasten death that
would be unskilful – and a criminal offence. Should it be to ease the condition of the dying that would
be skilful.
In the case where a family is asked permission to turn off a life support machine, they have to be sure
that the advice given is clearly one of no hope of survival. If there is hope of survival, then it would be
unskilful to end that person’s life, no matter what their situation. Here, of course, the questions
around so-called ‘vegetative states’ and artificial life support machines loom large. It is well to
remind ourselves that there are no absolute moral laws in a relative world. Each case will have to
be dealt with according to the circumstances. And ‘best intentions’ have to arise out of Right
Understanding.
Where a person is terminally ill, should they wish to die out of aversion, depression, sense of
pointlessness to suffering and so on, it would be unskilful to stop taking the medicine or sustenance
or receive other life supportive measures. However, should they see the futility of further treatment,
even though they want to live, to ask that no further life supportive measures be taken, that would
be skilful.
Now we all know that such situations can be far more complex than this. But hopefully such clear
standpoints give us a basis from which we can act as skilfully as the situation will allow us.
I have here tried to point to the highest ideals of Buddhadhamma. I aspire to them, yet hope I am
never tested. And should I fail, there will surely arise another opportunity for growth! In the teaching
of the Buddha, even unskilfulness, fully acknowledged, can become a cause for spiritual advancement.
If you want to find a good web based source for discussion the BBC has a very readable site on all the
important ethical issues www.bbc.co.uk/ethics
The site that best covers ethical issues from the point of view of Buddhadhamma is:
www.buddhistethics.org