This is a detailed guided meditation on how to practice *Vipassanā Bhāvanā*, insight meditation as taught by Mahāsi Sayadaw of Burma.

First, we establish the body in a meditation posture. Some people sit on a chair, others use a small stool, but the usual position is to sit on a cushion on the floor with legs crossed. The hands rest one upon the other at the level of the lap, preferably the left hand on the right hand. Whatever position you adopt, the most important thing is that it be comfortable.

Make sure the spine is straight while keeping its natural curve. It's advisable not to lean against the back of a chair as this can induce sleep. Now, imagine a puppet string running through the spine from its base to the top of the head, gently stretching you upward, creating space between the vertebrae as well as a sensation of stretching and lightness. A sensation of energy travels through the spine without tension or stiffness. The head rests in balance at the top of the spine. The rest of the body relaxes from this central axis.

At this stage we can use simple exercises to help us relax better. First, we'll see if we can relax by simply suggesting to our muscles to let go. Begin at the top of the head and move through each part of the body going down and relaxing the muscles as best you can. So, the top of the head. Move down to the forehead. The eyes are gently closed. The cheeks. The jaws. The lips are together, the teeth don't touch. If the teeth are clenched, this creates tension in the jaws. The neck, the shoulders, the arms, the hands. Feel the whole body becoming light or sometimes heavy as the tensions leave.

Now, return to the rib cage. Relax it. Move down the body, the abdomen, the stomach, relax them as best you can, the back, the buttocks. To finish, just feel your legs heavy on the ground. The superficial tensions should now be released, at least partially.

But we may feel a deeper level of tension, more familiar, and consequently difficult to relax through an act of mental will. We can then use a second technique that relies on muscle contraction. In the areas where you feel tension, contract the muscles as much as you can before releasing them slowly. This is particularly effective with facial tensions. Contract the facial muscles as much as possible. Hold the contraction. Release. Again. Contract the facial muscles. Hold. Release.

This also works with tension in the neck and shoulders. Contract this whole area by raising the shoulders. Hold the contraction and release slowly. Again, contract the neck and shoulder area. Hold, release slowly.

The third effective technique for releasing tension felt in the chest area, while also having a beneficial effect on the whole body, is controlled breathing. Take a long, deep breath. Fill the lungs completely. Keep the lungs full as long as comfortable. Then let the rib cage drop rapidly while exhaling all the air. Then wait for the next inhalation to manifest naturally, to avoid hyperventilation. So let's now take a deep breath. Hold it. Release. Again, breathe in deeply, hold the air, release.

You can repeat this exercise as many times as necessary, but now you have probably developed a relatively deep state of relaxation and calm. We are now in a posture very favorable to meditation. The spine is energized without being tense. The rest of the body is relaxed as if hanging from this central column that is the spine. The head gently balanced at its summit symbolizes the balance of a relaxed and alert body.

Now try to feel for a few moments the posture as a whole and become aware of recognizing the qualities of alert energy and calm relaxation that are present in the body. Now, we need to develop the same state of relaxed attention and energetic calm in the mind, after having developed it in the body. And for this, we use the breath.

Place your attention at the level of the abdomen and feel how it rises and falls with the rhythm of natural breathing. This is not a breathing technique. One must not modify or interfere with the breathing. Just leave it as it is. If you have difficulty perceiving the breath at the level of the abdomen, see if you can feel the chest rising then lowering. And if not, you can also use the contact of the breath at the entrance of the nostrils. But, according to Mahāsi Sayadaw's technique, it's preferable to use the abdomen. See what suits you best.

Whatever place you have chosen, remain there. This is your reference meditation object, your anchor. This means you use this place to establish calm and alert attention. If you move attention from one place to another, for example from the nostrils to the abdomen, this diminishes your ability to develop calm and concentration. In other words, you would be less capable of observing with calm and alert attention without the mind escaping.

If you observe the breathing process at the level of the abdomen or chest, feel how this rises and falls, and use a noting word to calm the thinking process. So, on the inhalation, say internally "rising, rising" and on the exhalation, say internally "falling, falling."

After the exhalation, the inhalation sometimes appears immediately without any pause. But as you relax, a pause will appear. There may also be a pause before the initial inhalation. During the pause, there is the risk that the mind escapes into thoughts and fantasies. To avoid this, we choose a contact point. This can be the feeling of the hands on the thighs, the contact of the legs on the ground. Choose what is easiest, most obvious.

At the moment you feel the abdomen or chest rising on the inhalation, feel the sensations, observe them closely and direct your attention directly on them while noting "rising, rising." In the same way, when you feel the abdomen or chest falling on the exhalation, be aware of the feeling, of the sensations caused by the movement. Observe them attentively and say internally "falling, falling."

If there is a pause before the inhalation, use the contact point and say internally "touching, touching." Make sure to return immediately to the belly or chest at the moment of the next inhalation.

The process is the same if you concentrate on the nostrils. Except that in this case, you should rather use the following words: "In, in. Out, out." And in this case, we pay attention to the sensations at the entrance of the nostrils at the level of the upper lip, where the passage of air is felt most acutely.

It doesn't matter how many times you use the little mental noting word. Once may be enough. The most important thing is to be attentive to feelings and sensations. The word itself has little importance. It's just a simple and effective way to prevent the mind from wandering and to keep our attention on the object of attention. What we must be attentive to are the sensations caused by the breathing process.

Even practicing this way, the mind may wander into thoughts or fantasies. As soon as you come out of your reverie, simply note what the mind is doing. "Thinking, thinking, dreaming, dreaming, planning, planning, worrying, worrying," etc. Saying the word twice is enough. The first time is to notice what is happening. And the second to really recognize what the mind has gotten caught up in. Once you have said these two words and been attentive, bring your attention back with determination to observing the sensations caused by breathing.

Don't do this abruptly, brutally or using force. Training the mind is a bit like teaching a young puppy to sit. Each time it gets up, we make it sit down again gently, but firmly. If we get angry and hit it, it will just want to run away. So it's the same for our mind, gentleness and firmness, bringing it back with kindness, gentleness, firmness, determination.

Let's now practice this breathing meditation for a few moments, observing and noting all sensations. "Rising, rising, falling, falling, touching, touching." If your mind wanders, note what it's doing. "Dreaming, thinking, worrying," etc. And bring it back gently and firmly to meditation, to breathing. If you feel like sleeping, put more energy into the spine. Our posture is erect without being tense.

In this second part of the meditation, we try to establish calm and stable attention. It's normal to devote a good ten minutes to this practice, until the mind becomes relatively calm, at least until the grossest level of agitation has disappeared and we can observe the object, in this case the breath, relatively constantly.

We use the breath because it's a neutral feeling, neither exciting nor depressing. Feel the calm and gentle movement of the breath, a bit like the movement of a wave. Feel the neutral and pleasant sensations of breathing. This leads the mind into a silence that allows it to develop stable attention.

This type of concentration is different from the concentration we get when we do something absorbing like watching a movie or doing meticulous work. That concentration depends on stimulation. But the attention we need for spiritual practice appears when the mind is calm and tranquil. When we have established a centered and focused state of mind, we discover that another faculty develops, our intuitive intelligence, *paññā*.

Sometimes, when you try to listen to the radio, the interference is so strong that it's difficult to hear exactly what is being said. Once the crackling has disappeared, everything becomes clear. This crackling corresponds in meditation to the mental activity that thinks, imagines, plans. As soon as the mind is calmed, intuitive intelligence can investigate and see more clearly what is happening inside.

So our task now consists of establishing this focused, stable attention, animated by the intelligence *satipaññā*, not only on the breathing, but on everything that enters our field of consciousness. So opening this attention to everything that enters the field of consciousness.

We can refer to the case of the bird watcher. Bird watchers sit in an observatory. They are hidden and observe birds without being seen by them. In this way, the birds are not disturbed. It is then possible to observe their usual behavior objectively. Everything we know about how birds feed, build their nests, reproduce, etc., comes just from observation that has been made of them, from the simple fact of having watched them.

In the same way, the ability to be simply an observer, interested in discovering our true nature, the true nature of our body, our mind, and our heart. This is the key to spiritual practice. This capacity to be an attentive and benevolent observer.

This observation is not a quest for something. We are not looking for anything. We are simple observers who look without intervening at everything that appears in the field of consciousness. Just looking, feeling, welcoming, experiencing everything that manifests here and now, at the moment it occurs, in the way it occurs, without adding any thought about what is happening, any commentary, any judgment.

After having established this stable attention on breathing, we open the field of consciousness. If a sound is heard, our attention turns toward it immediately. And we use a little mental noting word. "Hearing. Hearing." We try to perceive the quality of the sound at the level of the eardrum itself. In this way, we prevent the mind from flying off toward the object, which might be for example the chirping of a bird, the sound of a passing car. So the objective is to prevent the mind from constructing a whole series of thoughts, concepts and imagination around the heard object.

It's the same with smells. In these cases, we say internally "smelling." And we put our attention at the level of the nostrils and in the nostrils themselves.

We do the same thing with any sensation in the body. For example, an itch, a tingling, a prickle, the sensation of the contact of the legs on the ground. We simply note what we observe. "Itching, itching, heaviness, heaviness, tingling, tingling," while maintaining attention at the very place where the sensations are felt. And we plunge our attention into the sensation to have as precise, intimate, exact, and deconceptualized a vision of it as possible.

Other sensations can appear in the body, like heat, cold, heaviness, lightness, all sorts of uncomfortable or pleasant feelings. And then there is generally discomfort linked to posture, for example pain in the knees. We can in this case use a specific word, internally like "pain," "heat, cold, pulling." If we don't know what word to use, it doesn't matter, we can use a general word like "sensation." This works very well too.

And it's important not to react to these sensations, unless they are so painful that they are intolerable. Using a little mental noting word is a technique we use to control the thinking faculty, in order to maintain stable attention on the object of attention. But attention itself lodges in the observed sensations.

And then, there can be sensations in the body caused by states of mind or emotions, energies. Some are unpleasant like fear, depression, guilt. Others are pleasant like excitement, joy, love. So we can use specific words like "guilt, joy, excitement, fear." The important thing is to feel fully in the body the state of mind or emotion.

Sometimes, some of our bodily sensations, we think they are caused by an emotion. For example, that a stomach ache is the result of anxiety. It's not necessary to identify or analyze these feelings as being the result of an emotion, energy or mental state. It's enough just to note and observe these sensations as you feel them. "Tension, tension. Nausea, nausea," etc.

And then there are also thoughts and images that can come. Note them just as they are, internally. "Thoughts, thoughts, images, images," and they will disappear. If you don't use this little noting word, these thoughts risk taking you into a waking reverie that can sometimes last the entire duration of the meditation.

Be particularly attentive to the judging mind. "It's bad, it's good, it's great, it's terrible," etc. Don't try to change, modify or interfere with this type of thought. Simply recognize them for what they are. "Judging, judging." We are not spectators who get involved in the mind's game, supporting one thought rather than another. On the contrary, we adopt the position of the observer, not that of the player, an objective and benevolent observer.

We just allow the mind's game to unfold right there, under our gaze. At each instant, we try to maintain this distance, this detachment in relation to what is happening in the body, mind and heart, this disidentification. We observe all these events as if they belonged to someone else, avoiding identifying with them. In this way, we can investigate them objectively.

So, no matter what happens, what comes, a sensation, a feeling, a thought, it's simply a matter of observing them with attention and benevolence, of feeling them fully, fully experiencing them in a direct way.

So now, let's settle in and watch the show with keen interest. Let's observe the continuous flow of mental and physical phenomena. Always begin with breathing. "Rising, rising, falling, falling, touching, touching." If the mind wanders, note what it's doing. "Dreaming, thinking, worrying," etc. and bring it back to breathing with gentleness and firmness.

If there is torpor or lethargy, drowsiness, energize the spine. Reestablish the posture. Do it slowly, very slowly, so as not to disturb the calm, concentration and stable attention you have developed. For this, you can use noting words that refer to the movement you are about to make and that you are making. "Straightening."

Initially, the body tends to be painful because it must get used to the posture. But there is sometimes also pain or tension caused by unresolved emotions or by mental states that have been until now repressed, not listened to, not welcomed. It's important to be able to integrate these feelings in the body, these bodily sensations, into the field of consciousness, to be able to relax with these tensions or pains and to develop toward them an interested, curious, benevolent attitude.

What is this pain? What is it to have back pain? What is it to have tension in the jaws? How does it translate?

Qu'est-ce que c'est? De tels inconforts, parfois importants, peuvent durer pendant toute une assise, même plusieurs assises, jusqu'au moment où ils se résolvent tout seuls d'eux-mêmes par la pratique et l'attention et l'accueil qui leur a enfin été accordé. Il se peut que la raison sous-jacente à ces douleurs ou à ces tensions soit inconnue. Mais la disparition de ces tensions ou de ces douleurs dans le corps est le signe que l'émotion qui était à leur origine a disparu, qu'une guérison s'est produite, que ce qui était stocké dans le corps comme ça s'est déstocké.

Nous avons besoin de développer de la patience pour supporter ce genre de choses et saisir l'opportunité de voir la douleur en tant que douleur, juste comme une sensation, sans rajouter aucun concept mental dessus. Séparer la douleur physiologique de ce qu'on appelle la souffrance, qui est plutôt liée à l'aversion ou à la peur autour de la douleur justement, ou d'autres choses. Donc on observe les deux dimensions: les sensations douloureuses dans le corps et nos réactions mentales à leur égard. On note les deux, on investigue les deux, on observe, on ressent et on accueille les deux. C'est un peu comme si on était au théâtre, à un endroit particulier où on peut voir à la fois la scène et la réaction du public.

Continuez à utiliser des petits mots de notation mentale. Poursuivez votre investigation. Continuez à observer, maintenez une attention stable, une attention aiguisée, une curiosité bienveillante. Qu'est-ce que c'est qui se passe là?

Si vous vagabondez mentalement, revenez à la respiration. C'est votre fondation, votre point d'ancrage. Revenez encore et encore autant que de besoin à la respiration, en utilisant ce soulever, s'abaisser, toucher. Si l'esprit vagabonde, ramenez-le avec fermeté et douceur à l'objet premier de la méditation, la respiration.

Vous vous sentez somnolent, léthargique? Redressez la colonne vertébrale, sans tension. Continuez à être attentifs aux tensions dans la région des épaules, de la nuque et des mâchoires et de leur envoyer de la détente.

Nous voici maintenant comme assis à l'intérieur de nous-mêmes, en train de regarder notre film intérieur. Le corps avec ses ressentis et ses sensations. Le cœur avec ses états d'âme et ses émotions. Et l'esprit avec ses pensées et ses images. Tout cela se déploie à sa guise, sans contrôle. Nous n'interférons pas avec. Le processus de révélation se fait naturellement.

Au temps opportun, beaucoup de choses réprimées peuvent émerger de l'inconscient, et elles se révèleront au bon moment, et le bon moment arrive lorsque nous sommes prêts à les accueillir, à les accepter ces choses difficiles, inconnues jusque-là. Sous cet angle, la méditation *vipassanā* s'apparente à une psychothérapie. Même des souvenirs d'enfance douloureux et traumatisants finiront par être éliminés du système. Et avec eux, tous les problèmes mentaux et physiques et les tensions qu'ils ont causées.

La magie de ce processus, c'est que nous n'avons rien à faire. Le simple fait de rester fermement établi à notre poste d'observation est suffisant. Le simple fait de rester fermement établi à notre poste d'observation est suffisant.

Le but de notre pratique ce n'est pas la psychothérapie. La guérison de notre cœur et de notre esprit est une conséquence naturelle de notre pratique. Le but de la méditation est d'atteindre des strates plus profondes pour voir et comprendre le processus de la souffrance. Comment la souffrance naît dans mon cœur, dans mon corps et dans mon esprit. Comment ça se passe? J'investigue pour voir cela. Je regarde ce qui se passe dans le corps pour voir ce processus.

Pour ce faire, une bonne manière de pratiquer et de prendre note et de voir clairement comment nous réagissons à l'agréable et au désagréable. Comment je veux ce que j'aime et je rejette ce que je n'aime pas. L'alternance entre je me complais et je rejette. Cette manière que nous avons de rechercher le bonheur en se complaisant dans l'agréable et en cherchant à supprimer ou à ignorer, à nous débarrasser du désagréable. Ce constant va-et-vient entre l'avidité et l'aversion est ce que le Bouddha a enseigné comme étant la cause de la souffrance qu'il appelle "deuxième noble vérité".

À chaque fois que se passe quelque chose d'agréable ou de désagréable, il nous faut noter la réaction de saisie ou de rejet vis-à-vis de ce qui est en train de se passer. Parfois, nous nous enfuyons de peur. La peur est la jumelle de l'aversion. Petit à petit, par la pratique, ces réactions d'aversion et d'avidité se calment et même finissent par s'arrêter. Et nous faisons l'expérience d'une équanimité profondément satisfaisante, même au cœur des expériences les plus douloureuses. Et ce faisant, nous pouvons continuer à investiguer toujours plus profondément l'origine de la souffrance.

Alors, laissez toutes ces douleurs et ces plaisirs remonter à la surface, s'exprimer sans les réprimer, sans continuer à les réprimer. Observez la réaction, la saisie, l'avidité. L'aversion, la peur est notée. Désir, désir. Aversion, aversion. Peur, peur.

Et toujours, encore et encore, recommencez par la respiration. Se soulever, s'abaisser. Toucher.

Cinquièmement, si votre esprit vagabonde, notez ce qu'il est en train de faire et établissez de nouveau une attention aiguisée sur la respiration. Vous somnolez, redressez-vous et maintenez l'énergie ou remettez l'énergie le long de la colonne vertébrale.

Au fur et à mesure que vous devenez de plus en plus conscient de tout cela que nous avons évoqué à l'instant, que votre conscience s'approfondit, conscience du corps, de l'esprit et du cœur, vous allez devenir de plus en plus attentif et conscient à ce que le Bouddha appelait les trois caractéristiques de l'existence.

La première est l'impermanence. La première réalité, c'est celle de l'impermanence, *anicca*. Tout se manifeste et disparaît. Tout apparaît et disparaît. Rien ne dure. Sensation, sentiment, humeur, émotion, pensée, image, etc. Tout est dans un flux continuel d'apparition et disparition, de début, de durée et de fin.

La deuxième caractéristique plus difficile à saisir est celle du non-soi, *anattā*. En observant tous ces phénomènes physiques et mentaux, vous remarquerez qu'ils se manifestent d'eux-mêmes. Personne ne les contrôle, et pas nous. Ils vivent par eux-mêmes, ils ont leur propre énergie. Par moment, il se peut que les sensations et les sentiments physiques et mentaux nous semblent lointains, comme s'ils ne nous appartenaient pas.

Auparavant, nous disions "mes sensations", "ma douleur", "ma colère", "mes pensées", "mes émotions". Mais maintenant petit à petit, nous sommes, pour ainsi dire, en mesure de les désigner grâce à la technique des mots de notation. Il y a une sensation, il y a de la colère, il y a une pensée, il y a un ressenti, il y a une énergie, il y a de la colère, de la peur, de la joie. De la douleur, il y a. Et non pas j'ai, je suis. Je suis en colère. Je suis joyeux. Non, il y a de la joie, il y a.

Nous sommes lentement et sûrement en train de nous éloigner d'une relation d'identification et de possession dans laquelle nous croyons faussement être ce que nous voyons, ce que nous pensons, ce que nous ressentons. C'est mon corps, mes sentiments, mes pensées. Au lieu de cela, nous nous dirigeons vers une position de détachement qui ne s'identifie pas, qui ne possède pas ce dont elle fait l'expérience. Et cependant, nous expérimentons tout.

Troisième caractéristique. Comme nous l'avons remarqué, à chaque fois que nous tombons dans une relation basée sur l'identification et la possession, le désir ou l'aversion apparaissent. Nous luttons alors contre les choses telles qu'elles sont. Nous voulons qu'elles soient différentes. Plus comme ci, moins comme ça. Ça, c'est la troisième caractéristique de l'existence, celle de l'insatisfaction, *dukkha*.

L'attitude à développer par rapport au corps, à l'esprit et au cœur est celle d'une personne locataire et non pas d'un propriétaire. L'observation de ces trois caractéristiques, *anicca*, *anattā* et *dukkha*, impermanence, non-soi et insatisfaction, nous permet d'accéder à des visions spirituelles profondes qui libèrent notre intelligence intuitive de l'illusion dans laquelle elle était jusqu'à présent et nous conduit vers la libération de toute souffrance.

Notre outil pour cela est la pratique de *vipassanā*. Cette attention pure, simplement regarder tout ce qui apparaît et disparaît. Cette présence sans choix, qui ne contrôle pas, ne manipule pas. Cette observation impartiale, qui ne juge pas, ne conteste pas. Cette introspection intuitive, expérimentant pleinement chaque phénomène mental, corporel ou du cœur tel qu'il est vraiment, ça c'est *satipaññā*, la faculté d'intelligence intuitive. Faculté même qui finira par se réaliser dans le *nirvāṇa*. L'inconditionné, ce qui n'est pas né, ce qui n'est pas créé, ne meurt pas.

Tout ce que nous avons à faire, c'est juste regarder, ressentir et expérimenter tout ce qui apparaît et disparaît. Ayons foi, ayons confiance. Au fond de nous se trouve cette intelligence intuitive. Une fois libérée de la confusion mentale et émotionnelle, notre intelligence intuitive a le pouvoir de comprendre, de prendre avec elle, d'accueillir, et de voir les causes de la souffrance et de l'insatisfaction. Et de nous conduire vers un état de contentement et de bonheur permanent.

Nous recommençons avec la respiration. Se soulever, s'abaisser, toucher.

Donc dernière petite partie. Dans la vie quotidienne, s'asseoir ainsi même juste quelques instants, assez longtemps pour réétablir une attention calme et alerte après chaque action, empêche nos émotions de faire boule de neige. Diminue le stress. Quinze secondes seulement peuvent suffire à nous recentrer. Avec la pratique, cela peut devenir et cela devient un état d'esprit ordinaire, réflexe, au lieu de quelque chose qui se manifeste uniquement dans des conditions particulières.

Un cœur paisible et un esprit alerte sont l'état que nous pouvons connaître à tout moment, même dans des situations très difficiles, quand nous les avons entraînés suffisamment par la pratique. Au sein de cet environnement intérieur, l'intelligence intuitive *satipaññā* peut œuvrer. Sans cet environnement stable et calme qui voit et accueille tout ce qui est, cette précieuse intelligence intuitive est perdue, noyée et contrôlée par un flot de pensées et d'émotions incessants.

C'est pourquoi nous avons intérêt à constamment faire et refaire encore l'effort de retrouver et maintenir cette posture intérieure que nous avons évoquée et développée dans cette pratique à l'instant. En fait, cela signifie vivre pleinement, pleinement conscient, vivre, être et non pas avoir. De cette manière, la pratique de *vipassanā*, la méditation de la vision intérieure, s'infiltre dans chaque moment de notre vie. Et nous en retirons de grands bénéfices.

Lorsque vous arrivez à la fin d'une période de méditation, comme ça va être le cas dans quelques instants, n'en sortez pas brusquement, mais lentement. Ne vous levez pas précipitamment, dès que la cloche sonne. Quand la cloche sonne, on l'écoute jusqu'au bout. Début, durée du son, fin du son. Commencez par ouvrir les yeux, en laissant la lumière pénétrer. Puis, balancez-vous d'un côté de l'autre. Ayez l'intention de vous lever, et dites-le vous, et levez-vous lentement et consciemment, de sorte à maintenir la stabilité de l'attention et votre capacité d'intelligence intuitive *satipaññā*, qu'elle soit là.

Mais avant de faire cela, avant de terminer, il est important de transformer la sagesse que nous avons pu obtenir pendant l'assise en une attitude d'amour bienveillant. Pour cela, nous le faisons avec la pratique de *mettā*, la bonté bienveillante, l'amour bienveillant, la gentillesse aimante, la bienveillance. Il est important de terminer chaque assise avec cinq à dix minutes de pratique de *mettā*.

Puissiez-vous être en sécurité, que vous soyez en bonne santé, que vous soyez heureux, que vous viviez dans le contentement et dans l'harmonie avec le monde, les autres et vous-même. Que vous soyez bientôt libérés de toutes les souffrances. Que vous fassiez l'expérience de la paix et des délices et de la béatitude du *nirvāṇa*. Que vous soyez heureux et en paix, libres de toute souffrance. Que votre cœur soit confiant, joyeux et ouvert. Que vous soyez libres de toute souffrance. Que vous soyez heureux et en paix. Que vous viviez dans le contentement et en harmonie avec vous-mêmes, les autres et le monde.

Que je sois en sécurité. Que je sois en bonne santé. Que je sois heureux. Que je vive dans le contentement et en harmonie avec le monde, les autres et moi-même. Que je sois bientôt libéré de toute souffrance. Que je fasse l'expérience de la paix et des bienfaits et des délices et de la béatitude du *nirvāṇa*.