*Namo Tassa Bhagavato Arahato Sammāsambuddhassa Namo Tassa Bhagavato Arahato Sammāsambuddhassa*

Homage to the blessed, noble and fully self-enlightened one.

*Bhagavā* is a term of address. So *Bhagavān* is a term with which one addresses someone, like "Father." *Bhante* is a diminutive of that, it's a smaller version of *Bhagavān*. Someone asked me what *Bhante* means. I told them "Adorable."

*Arahant* means that all his failings have been destroyed. *Arahant* means that all obstacles, negativities, have been abolished. So this is a pure person. And of course, self-enlightenment means that he discovered the path.

So what I want to do this evening is to see if it's clear that we cause suffering for ourselves. It's clear. I would like to explain how we cause suffering for ourselves. The importance of this is that it is important to see that we are the only ones who can put an end to suffering. This was the Buddha's discovery. There is a consequence of this which is difficult for us sometimes to accept.

So the consequence is that sometimes it's hard for us to accept this reality. And also we cannot heal someone else of their suffering. Of course we can relieve physical pain, we can comfort them, inform them. However, regarding inner suffering, well, only the person can heal it.

Now this suffering that we speak of from a meditator's point of view is summarized in the five hindrances. So this suffering we're talking about is somehow summarized in the five obstacles. So it's important to know how to deal with these obstacles. Most of you already know them, so it's rather a revision. But for other people, it's something that is new.

So there are many things that emerge in the fact of indulging in what is pleasant. What is important to know is that desire is born in the heart. And so it manifests as a need, a psychological need. And so it seeks something to satisfy this need. So the word *tanhā* is translated as... it's also translated as thirst, like a lack. If you can feel a desire for something.

So if you feel a desire for something that goes in the direction of an object. And so when it goes toward this object and it tries to grasp it or grasps it, there is a certain feeling of completeness, of satisfaction. But if you step back a little and then you hold where there is the birth of this desire, so really the birth of this, it's like an enormous open mouth. There is nothing inside. It's the sense of an emptiness, but in the bad sense of the term.

And unfortunately, or at least it's true for me, if I can stay with the desire there it's very easy for me to let it pass. But the moment the desire is already moving toward the biscuit it gains energy. So it gathers energy. And so if we are not attentive to this energy that grows, well this energy will attack the mind. And so thoughts will really appear around boxes of biscuits.

So this movement, this space between this nascent desire and then this movement of grasping is really... No, the moment of identity, "I want." So the movement of identity, so "I want this biscuit," it is very sudden. It's just like that. And as soon as I want, I have lost, I am in the power of this desire. So from the moment where I am in the "I want," well there I have lost, I am taken, I am under the grip of this desire. And I grasp the biscuit.

So now, in our meditation, you see, when we see the mind catching itself in something that is really pleasant, and so, during meditation, when we grasp something really pleasant, agreeable, so there, we are diverted from the mind. We turn away from the mind. For example, we are planning holidays. And we wake up and we note "planning, planning." And you have to keep it for a minute, you see, to really recognize it. So you really have to keep that consciously for a minute, for a moment.

And so, then, you have to turn away and return to the body. And there, you will become aware of the excitement. So you have to stay with the excitement. And so if you stay with the excitement, perhaps there you will realize this energy that wants to return to the mind. So you noticed that I point to the right, so that's the left brain. So really feeling this movement and waiting for it to die. And there, we simply exhaust this energy. And if we stay long enough, well, it will disappear.

That doesn't mean you no longer plan holidays. Because there is this habit in us... it's simply that there is this habit of always seeking happiness in the pleasure of the senses. And if for example one of our great pleasures in life is to visit other countries or other places, then there is there a lot of conditioning that will take time to dissolve. But the important thing is that we teach ourselves not to be hijacked by these desires.

But what is important is not to be completely catapulted by these desires. I have a friend who used to do long retreats, of six months or more. That was already a little while ago. And between times, he was sex, drugs and rock'n'roll. And on one retreat, he began to plan his trip to South America. And during a retreat, he was planning a trip to South America. And he told me that in reality, these six months of retreat, he dedicated them to planning his vacation. And that was a great lesson for him. Because he never went there. Because he never went there.

So when you perceive a desire or something that attracts us, well simply return to the body. This is what the Buddha calls renunciation. Renunciation is not to confuse renunciation with self-mortification, which in Buddhist scriptures generally means giving more suffering in order to overcome suffering.

I once met a man who had been in Buddhism for some time and he had a horrible toothache. So I said to him, why don't you go to the dentist? He said, no, I'm training to get used to this pain in case other pains come. But how do you know that pain will come? So he suffers with this toothache simply because he thinks he will have other pains in the future.

So renunciation is stopping when we are doing something to become aware of our attachments. And so to sit with this attachment and wait for it to pass. So there I suggest a small exercise to confront this attachment. It's for people who watch television. To wait for your favorite program to come. Wait for your favorite program to be there. Make sure you have a glass of water beside you. Sit comfortably. Don't turn on the television. Observe the pain. And let it pass, let go of more of that.

So a few years ago, I watched an Australian series in three parts. So it was about three Australian women who were traveling in Europe and who went to Morocco. And they were tricked into carrying drugs into Spain. And they were tricked. And the episode was about them being tricked and imprisoned. So, of course, they were caught. So, the whole episode was about the fact that they were arrested and then imprisoned. I missed the third episode. Even today, I ask myself, what could have happened? It's just a story.

So, all these, what the Buddha calls, hindrances, all these obstacles are linked to desire. So the more we can feel the desire and let it pass, the more we exhaust this conditioning, these conditions.

Now unfortunately... But fortunately, you don't do that only during retreat. You do it all the time. And that's difficult. So we understand now why when we return to a retreat we have the impression of facing the same stories. Because here we try really very hard to let go and then when we return to daily life we do as before.

So if we can, just in our daily lives, just push slowly... yes, and you know, just very slowly, we stop the habit. If we consider a very serious habit, you know, like drinking... you see, people suffer, but they eventually... you know...

So, for example, more serious habits like cigarettes or drinks, well, gradually, this changes. But the danger, of course, is that the lack, the emptiness is always there. The seed is always there. And if a person is too confident, very quickly she can fall back in love. You hear tragic stories of alcoholics.

So we hear tragic stories about alcoholics and then people who are addicted to drugs. So there I think of someone who conquered alcoholism around the age of 30. And he didn't drink until the day he retired at 65. And there to celebrate he had a drink. And according to the story he died in three years.

What this tells us is that this lack is very deep in us. And this lack has its foundation in the self, in this idea of the self. So, remember, the self is not a thing. So, remember, the self is not a thing. It's a relationship. It's like the word marriage. Marriage doesn't exist. But what exists is a continuous relationship between two people. So, the self is not a thing, it's a relationship that we have with this life.

So the self is not a thing, but it's the relationship that we have with life, with this life. And the relationship is dual. So there we have spoken of things that were pleasant, but... On the other side, there are all the things like boredom, what makes us angry, what depresses us. In that case, the emotion is different because the mental state is negative. But it's the same psychology.

So there is this hatred or this fear that seeks the object. This comes from an attachment to an object. Or the attachment to a person. Or a way of life. Ah! As soon as something threatens it, then it must be destroyed, annihilated. And so as soon as something threatens it, it risks being destroyed. No, it must be destroyed. As soon as something threatens it, we want to destroy it. And if this attack is felt to be too much, then of course fear arises. And then fear makes us run away.

You can see how these opposites function. At their extremity, there is murder and suicide.

But at least in our meditation we can see this movement. We can see this movement that wants to indulge, indulge in something. But we're going to begin to see these things that bring up frustration or anger. And these things that bring up fear and anxiety. More like friends. Because they show us where we have created a barrier. Because they show us where we have created barriers. If we can undo these barriers a little bit, these things will begin to disappear.

If we are in a relationship and then we really grasp it like "this is my relationship," so the other can feel imprisoned when they move. Then there is anguish or fear of loss. And so, when the other moves, there can be either fear, the fear of losing, or anger to try to keep them more. But in reality, if the person releases their grasp, the other will feel freer. And by releasing their grasp, and so, by releasing the grasp, there is less fear for personal loss.

If I own a car, it's a brand new car. There is a lot of fear that things could happen to my car, accidents. But if it's just an old car, an old banger, so there it bothers you less if it's a little dented. Not too much.

So, in sitting meditation, we try to see this process clearly. So, during sitting meditation, we try to see this process clearly. So, when anger has arisen, we see how it's something or someone who has threatened what we have. And it's the same with fear. And it's the same thing with fear. And when we lose it, because there was this grasping, we feel despair. Grief.

So there is a connection here between... so there is really a connection between attachment and the fact of indulging in something and then the feeling of loss.

So, first, there is this sense of need, of addiction. And so, in the worst case, it seems to the person that they are completely possessed by this desire. They feel incapable of overcoming this desire, to overcome. So that's the worst case. In meditation, here, we can see that there is always a choice. So there is always a moment where we see the intention that we choose to reinforce.

So, when we say to ourselves, "I can't help it," we don't accept our complete responsibility. So there, in that case, we don't accept all our responsibilities. We are not responsible for ourselves.

For example, in a relationship, one of them goes to a relationship with someone else. They had sex? And often, they say, "Well, you know, I was... I was... I was... I had no choice." They thought there was no choice. And often, these people will say, "Well, I couldn't do otherwise, I had no choice." You see? So... So, what they do is they don't take full responsibility for their actions. But in reality, what happens is that they don't take full responsibility for their actions.

So, when we recognize that we are completely responsible for what we do, you see, it's actually a liberation. But when we become aware that in reality we are completely responsible for everything we do, then it's a liberation. Because at that moment, we turn inward to take our responsibilities. And that will allow us to heal ourselves, to make the effort to heal.

And with pleasures, so with pleasures, we must be aware actually of the consequences. So when we are attached to something, there is this compulsive nature of attachment. So if we lose it we feel grief. If we cannot obtain it we feel frustration. If we cannot play with it we feel boredom. And we are perpetually anxious about losing it.

And when we take pleasure in something, we don't feel any of all that. But it's only when it stops that there we realize that there is a consequence. So we must join the two, to see the suffering caused by attachment. And that will give us energy to undermine our attachments. So that's what we're doing here now. It's exactly what we're doing here, now. But especially around the theme of adventure. So it's the same technique, the same problem with everything we take pleasure in, everything that gives us pleasure.

There is now the obstacle of restlessness. So that can be physical restlessness or mental restlessness. So this also includes the restlessness there is around guilt, remorse. But most of the time, we feel it as the body being very restless or the mind being very restless.

So when we suffer from this, if it's in the mind, so if we perceive this, well, if it's for example in the mind, then note and then return to the body, note and return to the body. And repeat it constantly. So there can be moments where we really have the impression of going crazy. But we must continue, not believe in that, but just continue to return.

And when it's in the body, it can be useful just to continue, beginning from the top of the head and making our way through the body, you see, just feeling all the tension.

Si l'agitation est dans le corps, c'est bien de commencer par le sommet de la tête et puis de descendre progressivement et de continuer à pratiquer comme ça.

Maintenant, si nous parlons du doute, il y a un doute qui est bénéfique et qui nous mène vers le questionnement. Dans le bouddhisme, si on parle du doute, ça peut être soit le doute dans les enseignements du Bouddha, soit le doute dans la méditation, ou bien des doutes par rapport à soi, à sa pratique, ou bien dans l'enseignant. Si ce doute nous pousse à investiguer davantage, alors ça, c'est un doute qui est bénéfique. On peut l'appeler aussi curiosité.

Par contre, si c'est un doute qui nous arrête, qui nous empêche de faire quelque chose, alors à ce moment-là, ce n'est pas bénéfique. Quand le doute est là, essayez vraiment d'aller à l'intérieur, de le ressentir, et de voir ce qui renforce ce doute. Je pense que vous trouverez généralement la peur, et en général vous allez trouver la peur, quelquefois l'aversion, parce que ce doute sceptique peut vraiment ruiner la vie des gens.

Est-ce que je devrais accepter ce travail ? Est-ce que je suis assez à la hauteur ? Je ne sais pas, peut-être... et puis ils perdent le travail. Et puis ensuite, l'opportunité du travail est loin. Est-ce que je devrais être avec cette personne ? Est-ce que c'est la bonne personne ? Et puis on attend trop longtemps et puis elle est loin.

So, be careful of skeptical doubt. Always stay with that feeling if it's there, the fear, you see. But continue, you know, continue to put faith in the practice, faith in yourself. Donc, faites attention quand il y a ce doute sceptique de vraiment renforcer la foi dans la pratique.

It can be helpful not to think of life as success and failure, you see. Et donc ça peut être une aide de ne pas voir la vie comme soit c'est un succès, soit c'est un échec. Mais plus comme un défi ou bien un essai. Trial and error. On essaie et puis on verra. On apprendra pas de l'erreur.

Si vous pratiquez comme cela, il n'y aura pas de sentiment d'être embarrassé et d'infériorité. J'ai établi un centre au nord de Londres. Donc j'avais cette attitude : essayons. Donc j'ai dit à la personne qui était avec moi que si nous n'avions pas un groupe à la fin du mois de septembre, eh bien, ça ne se produirait pas. Nous avons fait de la publicité partout dans le district. Dans le district, il y avait essentiellement des grecs orthodoxes et puis des musulmans. Et l'affiche avait un mauvais numéro de téléphone. Et donc la nuit suivante, le voisin est arrivé et nous ne l'avons jamais revu, et le lundi suivant, personne n'est arrivé.

Arrivé à Noël, c'est devenu assez clair qu'il fallait qu'on sorte de cette histoire et qu'on abandonne le projet. Donc j'ai été surpris quand je suis allé à la société bouddhiste à Londres. Il y avait un groupe de personnes comme ici qui se rencontraient tous les jeudis. Donc je leur ai dit que le centre n'allait pas et que nous allions le fermer. Et donc, l'émotion principale qui émanait d'eux, ce n'était pas le chagrin. Ils étaient embarrassés pour moi. Mais moi, je ne le ressentais pas du tout. Pour moi, c'était juste : on a essayé, et puis, enfin, c'est erreur.

Donc pour moi, ça veut dire que si vous avez la bonne attitude, vous pouvez tout essayer et puis échouer, c'est OK. Donc, soyez prudents du doute sceptique. Soyez vraiment attentifs à propos du doute sceptique parce que c'est celui-là qui va vous empêcher d'essayer de faire quelque chose.

Et puis pour terminer, nous avons ce que mon maître appelle deux très bons amis : la léthargie et l'endormissement. They always come and say what you need is a little rest. Donc ils viennent toujours en disant tout ce dont tu as besoin c'est de te reposer un petit peu. You need a little power nap. Il faut que tu aies une petite sieste qui va te revigorer.

So, our duty when these feelings come is very simple. We stay awake. Donc, notre devoir quand ces sensations arrivent, c'est simplement de rester éveillé.

Donc, pour les personnes qui n'ont pas encore essayé cela, vous serez surpris de découvrir... si votre tête vous semble comme du porridge et que vous êtes au milieu de cet état-là, il est tout à fait possible de se réveiller de cet état comme si vous vous réveilliez le matin avec le soleil qui rayonne.

Donc la force de la léthargie et de la torpeur est proportionnelle à notre attachement. Donc pourquoi être attaché à l'oubli ? Simplement réfléchissez combien de fois étiez-vous allongé dans le lit le dimanche matin ou n'importe quel matin dans cet état d'oubli tranquille confortable, juste en dessous de la conscience. Donc vous sortez quelques fois de cette étape juste pour vous prouver que vous êtes encore en vie. Parce que c'est un état vraiment très agréable. C'est ça la première chose.

La deuxième chose, c'est que nous utilisons le sommeil pour s'éloigner de nos sentiments d'être un peu déprimé, un peu laissé-aller, un peu découragé. Donc, nous nous mettons sur la couche et nous sommeillons pendant un petit temps. Nous nous allongeons sur le canapé et puis nous nous endormons. Donc de manière malhabile, nous avons créé cette énergie qui nous aspire dans ce trou noir. Et c'est quelque chose dont nous devons vraiment reconnaître, c'est une énergie. Et donc c'est cela, il faut vraiment reconnaître que c'est une énergie. Donc c'est vraiment un aimant très fort qui vous attire vers l'oubli.

Et là, notre travail, c'est simplement de rester éveillé. Et une façon est de garder l'attention en mouvement. Et une manière de faire cela, c'est de garder l'attention toujours en mouvement. Donc si vous ressentez cela dans la tête, alors bougez, essayez de voir où les limites se situent, continuez de bouger. Et c'est pareil avec le corps, vous voyez, où vous ressentez la fatigue ? Vous le ressentez dans vos gros orteils ? J'ai ressenti de la fatigue dans mon gros orteil. Et simplement de garder l'attention bougée dans le corps vous garde éveillé.

Et en faisant cela, mindfulness gathers energy towards itself. Et donc, en pratiquant de cette manière, la pleine conscience va se renforcer et collecter de l'énergie. Et puis, tout à coup, vous êtes parfaitement éveillé.

Mais si l'endormissement est trop fort, à ce moment-là, vous pouvez toujours vous lever ou bien aller faire une promenade. Mais la chose importante, c'est que si vous allez vous promener, n'allez pas vous promener pour vous débarrasser de cet état de torpeur, mais vraiment pour le ressentir. Donc vous le portez d'une manière gentille et vous le ressentez toujours dans le corps. Et de cette façon, cette énergie s'épuise, comme n'importe quelle autre énergie.

Et là, vous devez faire une décision qui va faire trembler la terre : ne plus jamais s'allonger au lit avec l'intention de s'adonner au sommeil.

Donc, ça nous ramène encore à notre gros problème, hein ? Donc là, ça nous ramène à notre problème principal : de ne pas avoir d'attente excessive pendant les retraites, à moins que nous mettions de l'effort dans notre vie quotidienne. Donc si vous utilisez ce papier juste pour glisser à travers et si vous avez des questions, vous pouvez toujours venir me les poser.

"Est-ce que vous pourriez en dire plus ? Vous avez dit que le 'self' était une relation. Est-ce que vous pouvez dire plus sur le soi ?"

"Vous dites que le soi est une relation. Est-ce que je peux parler de ça demain soir ? Il y a des livres écrits à ce sujet."

J'espère que mes paroles ont été une aide. Je prie que vous soyez délivrés de toute souffrance, tôt plutôt que tard.