*Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammā sambuddhassa*
*Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammā sambuddhassa*
*Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammā sambuddhassa*
Homage to the Blessed One, the Noble One, the Perfectly Enlightened One.

This teaching that we are going to give is simply to review the most basic things, to remind ourselves what right mindfulness truly means. I also want to go into more detail about this particular technique.

To understand what right mindfulness means, it is good to review what happened in the Buddha's life. Remember that he left the household life for two particular reasons. His youth was over, and after youth, the only thing one can expect from life is sadness and suffering.

One of the things that had happened to him was that he was almost disgusted by having had too much pleasure in his life. If you remember the story, one morning he woke up and it was the end of a party that had gone on all night, and the people were asleep in disgusting postures. There was vomit everywhere. It was really debauchery. A feeling of disgust towards that—we have certainly all experienced that once. So that was the first thing, the first trigger: this lack of interest he had towards pleasure.

But at a deeper level, he also became aware of something else: that in life, there weren't only pleasures, there was also aging, illness, and death. And this created in him what today we would call an existential crisis.

In those days, remember, everyone—even in the West today—everyone in that part of the world believed that life continues after death. So the way they saw things, it wasn't only that after youth there would be illness, old age, and death, but that this would start again. After death, there would be old age, illness, and death again, forever.

So we can say that this was truly the great question, the great problem of his age. It wasn't only his question; it was also the question people asked themselves in his time. There were many men, in particular, who left home, who left family life, to launch themselves into this spiritual quest to understand how to get out of this problem.

There were apparently three major efforts to respond to this problem. The first was what we would call materialism. One of the responses was what we would call materialism today. This way of seeing things is to say okay, there is only this life, there is no other after, so we better enjoy it to the maximum while we can. But it seems that the Buddha was not attracted to this way of seeing things.

There was also another practice that was done at that time, what we call the *jhānas*—the deep meditative absorptions. Even by practicing on the breath, we can develop these magnificent ecstatic states. Yes, if you remember, when I spoke to you about breathing meditation, I said, can you feel that the breath is something neutral, but at the same time pleasant? And simply staying with this sensation of the breath is something that soothes the body, that does good to the heart and brings silence to the mind.

If one develops this gradually, it becomes a very positive, very beautiful, very pleasant state of mind. And when someone really has the habit of practicing these *jhānas*, one no longer needs anything. When you are in that state, living in Asia, all you need is a good tree, a beautiful tree, a piece of cloth to cover yourself, and a little food from time to time. And that's all. One can live in a very beautiful and peaceful way like this.

It seems that at the Buddha's time, there were many ascetics who lived this way. So the Buddha, who was called Gautama at the time, noticed that when he came out of his states of total bliss in meditation, he found himself in the same unhappy, anxious situation he was in before. He had the impression that this didn't really answer the fundamental question of whether one could truly put an end to this feeling of dissatisfaction and suffering that inhabits us.

So he tried something else, and this was the practices of self-mortification. What people who practice self-mortification think is that the problem, the root of our problem of suffering, is in our body. For example, they tell themselves that if one eats less and less, if one completely loses appetite, one will stop suffering from greed and covetousness. If you stay away from all sexual temptation or other kinds, the mind will stop being agitated.

So he practiced this path, and he became very strong. He said he could feel his spine through his stomach. After a few years of this, he discovered that there was just more suffering.

So we can imagine, there, he was with five friends with whom he practiced like that, then he left them. And there, he is in a situation we would call today existential despair. He can no longer return home because there, there is nothing more that he could consider as true happiness. All the practices that could be found in his time, he tried teachers, ascetics, nothing worked. So we can imagine him sitting at the roadside and feeling really unhappy and desperate.

We even know her name. A woman called Sujāta passed at that moment in front of the Buddha, and it happened that she had food in her hands, which she intended to offer to deities, goddesses. It was rice pudding. Everyone knows the salvific effect of rice pudding, so she offers him this rice pudding and this revives him.

At this moment, he suddenly had a memory that came back to his mind, something that had happened in his childhood. He remembers his father who was opening the harvest season by performing a ceremony. And there this is really a crucial point that will turn things around in his search for the end of suffering.

So we must try to picture this child who was about six, seven, or eight years old. When you see a child become very interested in something, there are one or two very obvious characteristics. The first thing is that the eyes fix on the object that interests them. For example, if they discover for the first time a little creature, you will see the eyes fix on it. And also the jaws that open, that drop. They look almost stupid with their mouth open, and the parent of course gives them a slap on the head and tells them to wake up a bit. But in reality it's a state of absorption.

And there is a characteristic in this form of absorption that is not found in the famous absorptions we spoke of earlier that bring ecstasy, and this quality, the difference, is curiosity. So we have this quality of absorption—this very clear observation of what is happening. And then there is this desire to know, to understand.

So it is with this determination, with this memory of his childhood, where he remembered that there was this curiosity in addition, that he decided that he would not move from this place where he was—either he would find the solution to his problem, or he would die. And this was his chance; it was also ours. In six hours, he managed to find the solution to the problem.

So in this right mindfulness we speak of, it is this quality of wanting to find the answer. And so there are two parts. These two words return constantly in this discourse which is called how to establish right mindfulness. There is the word *sati* which in Pali means attention, and it is about an open attention. And it has in addition this quality of equanimity, of equality, which means that one is not turned towards something particular that one would be seeking. This particular quality is to be perfectly open in the head and open at the level of the heart, and in this gaze that one carries there is curiosity.

So those who have heard of the seven qualities that allow one to advance towards awakening, there is *pīti* which is interest. Perhaps we will speak of this more tonight.

So when you begin to sit, if you ask yourself, you know, what am I trying to establish? It is to ask yourself the question and tell yourself what am I trying to establish in this practice. Try to bring to your mind the image of this child.

And all these techniques that we find in all schools of Buddhism, they have the goal of bringing us to this particular state. Whether it's zazen, shikantaza, dzogchen, *vipassanā*, it's always the same. They all try to bring us to a position where we can observe, feel, and experience what is happening in a very direct way.

So the goal of all these techniques is to allow us to feel, to see, to understand in a very direct way what is happening in the instant. So when this is clear in our mind, we better understand what the technique of this tradition is, and it is to make us understand.

In this tradition, there are three particular techniques. The first is to note, to become aware of a word, simply. The second is to slow down, very slow. And the third is to be conscious of our intentions.

So now, our greatest enemy is the head. And in all this work, our enemy number one is the mind, the mental, thoughts, imagination. In Zen they call this "no-mind." So people think that in Zen they are taught to empty the head, but it simply means not thinking. Now why is this the problem?

Because in reality, everything that passes through our head—thoughts, images, etc.—represents our relationship with past experiences. You don't look at this apple; you look at the apple on which you have put the whole history of apples. And this is the reason why at the moment you bite into this apple, you are not feeling it; you are saying it's a good apple, it's a bad apple, it could be sweeter, I've eaten better ones.

And as a result, we never manage to really be tasting this apple as it is in the instant. It's always in comparison with all the apples we have already been able to eat in the past. And it's exactly the same on the personal level. When we know someone, we can never meet them as we met them in the beginning. We always place on them our experience that we have had with them.

So how to return to this original mind? This is a phrase we also use in Zen, the original mind, the beginner's mind. How to return to this experience of the child who sees for the first time?

Of course, our position is not the same as a child, because now we have developed what we call intelligence. We say in Buddhism that a child under the age of seven cannot be awakened, liberated. From seven to eight years old, yes, it's possible. Because, as you know, something happens at that moment. You certainly know it; there is something important that happens at that age.

Already, we are much more conscious of problems of good and bad, and so guilt begins to be born. And as a result, we begin to understand what *kamma* means. And the second thing is that we no longer really believe in what happens in our head, our imagination. That's why we can no longer believe that Santa Claus comes down the chimney.

And these two great changes make our relationship to the world change. And so, we try nevertheless to continue this process, to see the mental as it really is.

So how to stop this mental that turns in thought all the time? In this tradition, what we do is transform all this intellect; we put it into a single word. For example, when I do walking meditation, and at the moment when I lift the foot, I say a word: "Lifting, lifting, lifting."

And in fact, this word has the purpose of retaining all the mental. The mental at that moment no longer has the possibility of thinking about the fact of lifting the foot, and as a result my attention moves away from the word, which has no interest in itself, and so I am with the sensation. And the sensation can only occur in the present moment.

And it's a direct experience, from moment to moment. Now, a person who begins to note may feel that the word stops feeling. They seem to be just here, in lifting, lifting, and the foot is somewhere here. They have the feeling that they are in the head saying lifting, lifting, and that in fact during this time the foot is somewhere down below.

In fact, what this tells us as meditators is that our intuitive attention is stuck at the level of the intellect. The person identifies completely with their thought: "I think therefore I am."

So by putting all our attention on the sensation, we withdraw the intuitive quality of our intelligence from thought. And very slowly, the word becomes like a background note, pushing the attention towards the object. So now, when the mind becomes more and more serene, this intelligence that moves towards the object of attention becomes stable.

So we say very clearly in Buddhism that we cannot have two moments of knowing at the same time; we cannot have two thoughts at the same time. We can have the impression when you watch a film and you eat sweets and you hear and you see, it seems everything is happening at the same time, but it's the magic of the mind. In fact, these are momentary consciousnesses all put together.

It's about several moments of knowledge that are brought very close to each other and give the impression of having a continuous thread of knowledge, of consciousness. Have you seen very precise images that show how the eye moves when it looks at an image?

En réalité, pendant que nous croyons voir simplement une image, notre œil fait des tas de mouvements dans toutes les directions autour de cette image. À chaque moment, ces petits pixels arrivent dans le cerveau et sont manufacturés, mais ce que nous voyons, c'est cette image stable. À chaque fraction de seconde, il y a tous ces pixels qui se rapprochent, qui forment un motif et qui est pris dans le cerveau, qui est traité complètement comme un ordinateur. Mais nous, tout ce qu'on croit voir, c'est simplement une image dans un instant.

Donc quand nous notons, il y a deux moments très évidents de cognition ou de conscience. Il y a le ressenti et puis le notant, c'est la réflexion. Même si nous disons « montant, montant » et il nous semble que le mot est concurrent avec le ressenti, même par exemple au moment où l'abdomen se soulève, on pense « soulève, soulève », on a l'impression que le mouvement est parallèle au mot que l'on prononce, que l'on pense. En réalité, la conscience est divisée en deux. Il y en a une partie qui est en train de sentir et puis l'autre qui note, et l'autre qui sent, et l'autre qui note, et ça se rapproche très très vite.

Displacing the attention just on the feeling with the noting becoming ever more in the background. Mais quand cette notation reste de plus en plus dans l'arrière-pensée et qu'on porte l'attention de plus en plus sur la sensation, there comes a moment when the mind, when that *satipaññā*, that intuitive awareness locks into the present moment. Et comme notre attention est sur la sensation, elle va se bloquer sur la sensation. Et à ce moment-là, la note, elle s'arrête. Et là, on appelle ça un moment de *vipassanā* pur.

Ces instants sont parfois minuscules mais ils sont très puissants. On ne peut pas les fabriquer, les forcer à venir. Si on force, on va dépenser trop d'énergie et ça va nous agiter. Et au contraire, la façon de procéder, c'est de se détendre en étant conscient de la sensation. Et toujours avoir cet intérêt, cette curiosité. Vous voyez l'enfant, dans cet instant de curiosité, complètement détendu, sa mâchoire s'ouvre. La prochaine fois que vous verrez que vous êtes particulièrement intéressé par quelque chose qui soulève la curiosité, observez votre corps et voyez comme il est détendu à ce moment-là. Je parle plus d'un émerveillement dans la nature, pas devant un ordinateur.

Et c'est pourquoi le Vénérable Mahāsī Sayādaw a développé cette technique particulière. Ça peut être juste une note pour garder la tension bien stable, ou ça peut être plusieurs notes, ce suivant, ça n'a pas d'importance. Par exemple, si vous vous sentez très fatigué ou endormi, ça fait du bien de noter, parce qu'en fait, pendant que vous notez, ça vous réveille, vous rassure. Et si votre mental est très agité, si vous le notez aussi vite que ça se produit, ça vous évite de partir plus loin.

Maintenant, avec toutes ces techniques, dans toutes ces techniques il y a toujours des choses qui vont nous inquiéter inutilement. Et un des problèmes par exemple c'est chercher le mot juste. On s'aperçoit qu'on est en train d'essayer d'être des poètes au lieu d'être des méditants. Donc pour noter, ne vous cassez pas la tête à chercher le mot juste. N'importe quel mot qui va bien donner cette suggestion de ce que vous êtes en train de vivre, ça ira. Et on s'aperçoit au contraire que le langage est très cru pour décrire les choses. On n'a peut-être pas tellement de mots pour décrire des choses très subtiles, des sensations subtiles. Donc on ne se casse pas la tête, on va simplement utiliser le mot « sensation », ça ira très bien.

Parfois vous pouvez noter ce que vous faites : « ressentir, ressentir », dans ce sens je suis en train de ressentir, ressentir. Parfois ça peut être le mot « sentir » : « je suis en train de sentir, sentir, sentir ». Donc ce n'est pas important combien de fois vous allez noter les choses, mais l'important il faut que vous sachiez que si vous notez, c'est pour maintenir votre attention bien présente. Et le mot n'est pas important dans la mesure où il est proche de ce que vous ressentez effectivement dans l'instant.

Et la deuxième technique, c'est cette histoire d'aller doucement, très doucement. C'est très simple parce que, comme vous le savez, plus vous allez lentement, plus vous voyez. C'est en fait très simple, parce que comme vous le savez très bien, plus on va lentement et mieux on voit les choses. Par exemple, si vous faites le tour du parc en courant, si vous le faites en marchant, et si vous le faites en marchant très lentement, vous verrez bien que plus vous marchez lentement et mieux vous verrez le parc.

Donc aujourd'hui, si vous vous voyez vous-même vous bousculer, arrêtez-vous. Si vous sentez que vous vous bousculez, vous courez vers quelque chose, arrêtez-vous. Arrêtez-vous. Oui, laissez tout le système se calmer. Et puis, on y va, et puis vous repartez un peu plus lentement. Si par exemple vous entendez la cloche qui vous dit que c'est l'heure du thé ou quelque chose et vous sentez en vous cette poussée d'énergie, ne bougez pas, attendez. À ce moment-là, si vous ressentez cette énergie qui vous pousse vers l'avant, ne bougez pas, vous attendez.

Dans la journée nous avons beaucoup d'actions répétitives, par exemple ouvrir et fermer des portes. Faites de cela, de ce geste, quelque chose de conscient. Faites quelque chose de délibéré. Au moment où vous la faites, vous savez ce que vous êtes en train de faire. Et l'intérêt de cette chose, c'est que pendant qu'on est là, on n'est pas en train de projeter ce vers quoi on va, on est là, présent.

La main est déjà là et le corps arrive un moment après. Par exemple, quand la cloche sonne pour le déjeuner, à l'instant où on entend la cloche, notre esprit est déjà là-bas, en train de déjeuner, alors que notre corps, lui, il arrive une minute après. Donc, si vous voyez votre esprit qui va plus vite que votre corps, qui est déjà parti là-bas, lui dites : « reviens un peu ici, reste ici, avance ». Donc, nous voulons aller dans la salle de dîner, et ensuite, nous nous rendons à l'esprit, vous voyez, et nous restons avec l'esprit, en allant à la salle à manger.

Donc, rappelez-vous, dans toutes ces méditations, l'importance de l'esprit nous met dans le moment présent. Et dans toutes ces méditations, il faut bien prendre conscience de l'importance du corps, parce qu'il nous permet de nous enraciner dans l'instant présent.

Donc on ne vous demande pas d'aller très lentement tout le temps, mais à chaque fois que vous êtes seul, en particulier dans votre chambre par exemple, vous pouvez faire vraiment tous vos gestes très lentement. Et rappelez-vous, ce sont ces petits temps entre lesquels nous ne pensons pas importants que nous perdons tous les bénéfices de notre pratique.

Donc, par exemple, après cette émission, nous ferons plus de méditations de marche. D'ici à là où nous faisons la méditation de marche, c'est notre méditation. Par exemple, après cet enseignement, nous allons aller faire de la marche en méditation. Mais entre ce lieu et l'instant où on va commencer à pratiquer la marche formellement, c'est aussi de la méditation.

Donc vous êtes ici, bien calme, et puis vous allez méditer, vous courez vers votre endroit de méditation, et là vous vous posez. Tout le moment vous vous posez, tous les bienfaits du calme que vous avez acquis avant sont perdus. Et il faut se rappeler que tout ce que nous pratiquons ici, en ce moment, nous pouvons le pratiquer aussi au quotidien. Donc ça c'est pour la question d'aller doucement, de faire les choses doucement.

Donc la troisième chose qu'on voulait voir, c'est noter l'intention. Il faut se rappeler que le fait d'être conscient de notre intention nous permet d'avoir, de récupérer le contrôle sur nous-mêmes. Je ne sais pas si vous avez vu le rapport qui prouve, en inverted commas, « prouve », through these brain scans, that we make a decision before we know it. Il y a soi-disant des rapports qui prouvent, entre guillemets, qu'en étudiant le scanner du cerveau, etc., qu'en réalité nous faisons, soi-disant, nos décisions avant même d'en être conscient. Nous prenons des décisions avant même d'en être conscient.

So then we play a trick on ourselves and say, I decided to buy those chocolate biscuits. Et après, on se joue un jeu en disant : « j'ai décidé d'acheter ces biscuits au chocolat ». En fait, inconsciemment, vous l'aviez déjà décidé. Et ça, c'est ce qu'on appelle la vie qui manque de présence consciente. Ce qu'on va faire, c'est de rendre toutes ces intentions évidentes, claires pour nous.

Il y a un incident qui est relaté dans les commentaires autour des enseignements du Bouddha. Il y a certains d'entre vous qui ont peut-être essayé de lire le Visuddhimagga qui signifie la voie de la purification. C'est un commentaire sur les enseignements du Bouddha. Et un enseignant parle — donc c'est l'histoire d'un enseignant qui pendant qu'il parle bouge la main. À un moment donné sa main s'arrête et puis lentement dans le silence elle redescend et tous les élèves disent : « mais qu'est-ce qui s'est passé ? » Il dit : « je n'ai pas été conscient de l'intention ».

Donc toute action que nous faisons, forcément, quelque part, il y a une intention. Même le plus petit mouvement, forcément, a une intention derrière. Donc sur un retreat comme celui-ci, nous essayons d'être conscients de toutes ces petites intentions que nous avons. Dans une retraite comme celle-ci, nous essayons d'avoir conscience de toutes ces petites intentions que nous avons. Une des choses que l'on remarque surtout, c'est toutes les intentions qui viennent de se passer, dont on n'a pas pris conscience.

L'intention est très très importante dans les enseignements du bouddhisme parce qu'on dit que c'est là que commence tout le processus de conditionnement. C'est au niveau de l'intention. Beaucoup de notre conditionnement n'a rien à voir avec nos valeurs morales. Par exemple quand je bouge les mains pour exprimer quand je parle, ce sont des décisions sur le plan moral qui sont neutres. Mais quand ces intentions se déplacent sur un plan moral où il y a des décisions de type moral, à ce moment là on peut créer des graves problèmes, on peut créer aussi des belles choses.

C'est pour cela que j'ai mis beaucoup d'accent sur le processus de la nourriture. Le Bouddha lui-même était bien obligé de manger, n'est-ce pas ? Il expérimente le goût de la nourriture, mais il n'expérimente pas l'avidité de la nourriture. Et on dit dans les Écritures, le Bouddha, il fait le ressenti, il ressent le goût de la nourriture, mais il ne ressent pas l'avidité pour la nourriture. Il a conscience qu'une nourriture peut avoir du bon goût ou du moins bon goût. Mais la relation qu'il a avec la nourriture, c'est qu'il ne recherche pas le bonheur ou le plaisir dans la nourriture. On en reparlera plus profondément ce soir.

Vous vous entraînez à le faire tout le temps, du moment où vous vous réveillez jusqu'au moment où vous vous mettez à dormir, sans arrêt. Donc cette technique de noter est quelque chose qu'il faut faire normalement tout le temps. Depuis l'instant où vous vous réveillez jusqu'au moment où vous vous couchez, sans arrêt, sans arrêt. Notez, notez tout ce qui se passe, tout ce que vous ressentez.

Au départ, ça demande pas mal d'efforts parce qu'on préférerait dormir. Et aller lentement, vous voyez, prendre notre temps avec tout. Et puis il y a aussi cette technique de ralentir, prendre notre temps avec chaque chose. Essayez de voir si vous arrivez à faire ça. Vous arrêtez d'abord, prendre conscience de l'intention et puis agir.