So we begin with benefactors, with people towards whom we have a sense of gratitude and possibly towards whom we have no bad feelings. Just one benefactor.

May you be safe. May you be well. May you be happy. May you live contented and at peace with the world.

Allowing that image to fade. Allow that image to dissolve. Contact that benevolence within our heart.

Bring into your hearts all the people who are dear to you.

May you be safe. May you be well. May you be happy. May you live contented and at peace with the world.

Allowing these images to fade. Allow these images to dissolve. Feel this benevolence in our hearts.

And bring to our hearts all those who are friends and people at work. We bring into our hearts all those who are our friends, people in the workplace.

May you be safe. May you be well. May you be happy. May you live contented and at peace with the world.

Allow those images to vanish. We feel again this benevolence in our hearts.

We bring into our hearts a person we see but don't know, perhaps a neighbour.

May you be safe. May you be well. May you be happy.

Allow this person to dissolve, feeling again this benevolence in our hearts and bringing this benevolence, directing this benevolence towards ourselves. We offer ourselves blessings.

May I be well. May I be safe. May I be happy. May I live contented and at peace with the world.

Now we bring into our hearts of benevolence a person with whom we have a difficult relationship and we try to offer them at least no harm, not to hurt them.

May you be safe. May you be well. May you be happy. May you live contented and at peace with the world.

Having practised *mettā* in particulars, now we can begin to radiate it in a more general sense. First of all, to one another, here in this room, to our spiritual companions.

May we be safe. May we be well. May we be happy. May we live contented and at peace with the world.

Continue radiating it to all people in this district. Continue to radiate it to all people in this area. Whether they do skilful or unskilful things.

May you be safe. May you be well. May you be happy. May you live contented and at peace with the world.

Radiating to all people in Italy.

May you be safe. May you be well. May you be happy. May you live contented and at peace with the world.

Continue to radiate to all people in Europe.

May you be safe. May you be well. May you be happy.

Continue to radiate to all people in the world.

May you be safe. May you be well. May you be happy. May you live contented and at peace with the world.

Just for a moment bring to your mind those people who are suffering in one way or another. And offer them your wish for the end of their suffering.

Bring to your mind all people who are experiencing joy for one reason or another at this moment and offer them your wish that their joy may continue and offer them your wish that their joy may continue and grow.

Now we can begin to radiate our benevolence to all beings, in all directions, using our mantra, our chant, *Sabbe sattā sukhitā hontu*.

Use it as a vehicle to express this attitude of yours, this attitude towards all beings. Use it as a vehicle to express this attitude of yours, this attitude towards all beings.

So we chant it in the direction of all beings - in front, behind, to the left, to the right, above and below. We'll do it three times. And then three times for all beings in all directions. Express this recitation from the heart.

*Sabbe sattā sukhitā hontu, Sabbe sattā sukhitā hontu. Sabbe sattā sukhitā hontu, Sabbe sattā sukhitā hontu. Sabbe sattā sukhitā hontu, Sabbe sattā sukhitā hontu.*

*Sabbe sattā sukhitā hontu, Sabbe sattā sukhitā hontu. Sabbe sattā sukhitā hontu, Sabbe sattā sukhitā hontu. Sabbe sattā sukhitā hontu, Sabbe sattā sukhitā hontu. Sabbe sattā sukhitā hontu, Sabbe sattā sukhitā hontu. Sabbe sattā sukhitā hontu.*

Continue that now inwardly.

Now we'll do our little exercise to increase our determination, bringing to mind a character trait that we see as unwholesome and we can do these four stages of determination.

I can, I am able to resist the temptation. I ought to for my own benefit and the benefit of others. I want to - and remember you have to encourage yourself sometimes there. Remember that sometimes there you have to encourage yourself a little.

And finally, when this temptation arises, I will resist it. I can, I should, I want to and I will.

Bringing a virtue to mind that we would like to develop more. So, again, I can, I am able to develop it. I should do it for my benefit and that of others. I want to. And every time the occasion arises I will develop that virtue. I can, I should, I want to and I will.

So for one last time we direct this flow of benevolence towards ourselves. This ray.

May I be free of greed and selfishness. May I be free from hatred and malevolence. May I be free from fear and anxiety. May I be free from ignorance and delusion. May I be kind, sensitive, understanding and benevolent.

May I be forgiving and compassionate. May I be joyful and may I rejoice in the success of others. May I be tranquil and calm. May I be free from all my suffering. May I experience the peace and bliss of *Nibbāna*.

And radiating this good will to all beings in all directions. And radiating this benevolence to all beings in all directions.

May all beings be free from greed and selfishness. May all beings be free from hatred and malevolence. May all beings be free from fear and anxiety. May all beings be free from ignorance and delusion. May all beings be kind, sensitive, understanding and benevolent. May all beings be forgiving and compassionate. May all beings be joyful and rejoice in the success of others. May all beings be tranquil and calm. May all beings be free from their sufferings. May all beings experience the peace and bliss of *Nibbāna*.

*Sabbe sattā sukhitā hontu, Sabbe sattā sukhitā hontu, Sabbe sattā sukhitā hontu. Sādhu, sādhu, sādhu.*